With the aim to compose an introduction (avatāra) to the Middle Way (madhyamaka) that may help
one access (avatāra) the Middle Way Treatise, it seemed appropriate to present at first
a praise to the illustrious lady Great Compassion, the perfect cause of buddhahood and characterised
by being the complete protection for all the untold numbers of defenceless sentient
beings without exception trapped in the prison of cyclic existence, even before praising
the true and complete buddhas and the bodhisattvas. Hence, I expressed two stanzas, this
and the following one:From mighty sages hearers and half-buddhas come,While buddhas from
the bodhisattvas are conceived.Compassion, non-duality, awakening mind –These are what
serve as causes of the victor’s heirs. (1.1)

The illustrious buddhas are here termed mighty sages (munīndra) because they possess perfect
mastery as unsurpassed lords of Dharma, are also perfect supreme lords over the hearers,
solitary buddhas and bodhisattvas, and because the hearers and so forth are governed by their
command. From them the hearers and so forth come, meaning that they are born from them.
How so? Due to the fact that, when buddhas appear and teach the unmistaken ways of dependent
origination, they engage with that teaching through the stages of learning, contemplation
and meditation, and according to their particular propensities will then actualise the
final complete result of the hearers and so forth.

For some it may be that, although they do become erudite, realising the ultimate truth through
just listening to the teachings on interdependent origination, they do not attain transcendence
in their present existence. Although this might be the case, those who practice what
is taught will without doubt attain it in a future lifetime when the result of their yearning
ripens, in the same way that the ripening of karma will definitely come to fruition.
As Āryadeva states:When reality is understood, though hereThey may not reach transcendence,They
will certainly attain it effortlesslyIn another lifetime, just as with karma.1That
is also why the Middle Way Treatise states:When the complete buddhas do not appearAnd the
hearers as well are no more,The wisdom of the solitary buddhasWill be actualised independently.2

They are called hearers (śrāvaka) because they facilitate attainment of the result of the instructions:
‘It has been completed. After this I will not know another existence.’ Alternatively,
they are hearers because they hear (śrutvā) about the supreme result or the path of
unsurpassed true and complete awakening from the tathāgatas, and then proclaim (śrāvaṇatva)
it to those who aspire to it. Just as the White Lotus of Sacred Dharma Sutra states:Protector,
today we have become hearers,And will now proclaim supreme awakening.We will clarify
the awakening statements.Thus we are like the formidable hearers.3Although bodhisattvas
also fit this description, the hearers proclaim it without actually practicing in accord
with it, which is not the case for bodhisattvas.

The term buddha, awakened to reality, applies to all three: hearers, solitary buddhas and unsurpassed
true and complete buddhas. Hence, the term buddha is here used to refer to solitary
buddhas. These surpass the hearers due to their comparatively excellent development of
merit and wisdom, but are inferior to the true and complete buddhas as they lack their accumulation
of merit and wisdom, great compassion, two types of omniscience and so on. Hence,
they are half-. They are solitary buddhas (pratyekabuddha) since they develop wisdom without
being taught and gain awakening solely for themselves. As has been explained, the hearers
and solitary buddhas are from mighty sages … come, in the sense that they originate
from the tathāgatas teaching the Dharma.

From where then, are the mighty sages born? As stated, while buddhas from the bodhisattvas are
conceived. But aren’t the bodhisattvas described as children of the victor because they
too are born from the teachings of the tathāgatas? Why then is it said that that the illustrious
buddhas are born from bodhisattvas? That is indeed true. Still, there are two reasons
why the bodhisattvas are considered the cause for the illustrious buddhas: because they
are the particular circumstance and because they inspire the adoption.

That they are the particular circumstance means that that which acts as the cause for the circumstance
of being a tathāgata is the circumstance of being a bodhisattva. That they inspire
the adoption refers to the case of noble Mañjuśrī who as a bodhisattva was the very first
to inspire the illustrious Śākyamuni and the other tathāgatas to adopt the mind of awakening.
Being thus regarded as the principal cause that enabled the final result, it is taught
that the tathāgatas are born from the bodhisattvas.

Bodhisattvas are therefore to be esteemed, since it is recognised that they are the immensely
valuable perfect cause; since expressing veneration for the cause automatically implies
veneration also for the result; since the blessed buddhas teach that just as when a great
medicinal tree that will definitely yield limitless fruits is still at the stage of a sprout
and so on, and its leaves are tender, one must take care to protect it; and since the multitudes
of sentient beings they encounter that have a predilection for the three vehicles
will with certainty be impelled towards the Greater Vehicle.

As stated in the noble Heap of Jewels Sutra:Kāśyapa, it is like when honour is shown to the
new moon and not the full moon. Just so, Kāśyapa, should those who have faith in me pay homage
to the bodhisattvas, not to the tathāgatas. Why? Because it is from bodhisattvas that
the tathāgatas arise. And from the tathāgatas all the hearers and solitary buddhas arise.4With
this, it has been established through reasoning and scripture that the tathāgatas are
born from the bodhisattvas.

What then is the cause of the bodhisattvas? As was stated: compassion, non-duality, awakening
mind – these are what serve as causes of the victor’s heirs. Compassion means sympathy (anukampā),
and its aspects and nature will be explained. Non-dual mind is the intelligence
that is free from the two extremes of entities, absence of entities and so forth.

The awakening mind is described in the noble Omnipresent Dharmas Sutra:Through the mind of awakening
the bodhisattva will come to understand all dharmas: that all dharmas are equal in
the dharmadhātu. All dharmas, being adventitious and unstable, are empty of something to
be known and a knower. When within this mere recognition a bodhisattva gives rise to the
sentiment of thinking that, ‘All beings must reach the recognition that this is the nature
of things,’ that is what we call the awakening mind of the bodhisattva. It is the mind that
aims for the benefit and happiness of all beings; that aims for the unsurpassed; a tender
mind of love; an irreversible mind of compassion; a joyous mind that knows no regret; an
equanimous mind without stains; an unchanging mind of emptiness; an unobscured mind not
encumbered by labelling; a non-abiding mind free from aspirations.5That the principal causes
of the bodhisattvas are these three – compassion, non-dual intelligence and the mind of
awakening – is expressed in the Precious Garland:Its roots are the mind of awakeningFirm
as the king of mountains,Compassion without prejudiceAnd wisdom not tied to duality.6

Since compassion is the very root of the mind of awakening and wisdom of non-duality, the following
was stated with the wish to illustrate the preeminence of compassion:Since love is
like the seed for the abundant cropOf victorhood, is like the water for its growth,Like maturation
for its yield to then endure,It’s therefore that I praise compassion first of all.
(1.2)Just as seeds, water and the process of ripening are the essential prerequisites in
the beginning, middle and end respectively for a perfect harvest of grains and so forth
on the outer level, it is compassion that is said to be the very prerequisite in the three
periods for the perfect harvest of the victors. Likewise, when others are experiencing the
suffering of suffering, a compassionate individual wanting to protect all suffering sentient
beings without exception, will develop the firm resolve: ‘I must by all means deliver
this world from suffering and bring it to the state of buddhahood.’ And since one will not
be able to bring this commitment to fruition if one has discarded the wisdom of non-duality,
it is essential to engage in it through the wisdom of non-duality. Thus, the seed of
all the qualities of buddhahood is compassion. As stated in the Precious Garland:What rational
individual would disparageThe Greater Vehicle which teachesCompassion as the prerequisite
of allAnd wisdom that is free from stains?7

Though the mind of awakening has been generated, if one has not repeatedly moistened it with
the water of compassion, preparations for the vast fruition will not be accumulated, and
one will inevitably transcend to the nirvana of hearers and solitary buddhas. And, although
one may reach the state of the boundless fruition, without fully ripened compassion this
will not become a lasting resource, and the unbroken one-to-one lineage of the great assembly
of noble fruition will not flourish for long.

Now, to clarify the distinctive forms of compassion according to how they relate to particular
objects, I wished to express this as an homage:At first, the though of ‘I’ and clinging
to a self;Then ‘This is mine’ as they become attached to things.I bow to that compassion
which sees every lifeAs powerless as buckets on a water-wheel. (1.3)In the world, self-clinging
develops before the clinging of ownership, as one imputes the idea ‘it exists’ onto
a non-existent self and ends up clinging to it as real. And then, with the thought, ‘This
is mine,’ clinging to all other objects not included within this self-clinging comes.

The worldly state of clinging to self and mine is (1) to be tightly bound by the ropes of karma
and afflictions; (2) to be reliant on the movements of consciousness, the operator of
the machinery; (3) to be ceaselessly rambling through the depths of the great well of cyclic
existence, from its peak to the Incessant hell; (4) to descend effortlessly of one’s own
accord but having to be drawn up with great effort; (5) not to be following a fixed order
of prior, latter and middling components when it comes to the torments (saṃkleśa) of afflictions,
such as ignorance, of karma and of birth; and (6) to each day be battered by the
suffering of suffering and the suffering of change – and hence to never transcend this water-wheel
condition. Since the bodhisattva, motivated by immense compassion for those tormented
by suffering, develops the wish to protect them, homage is offered to the illustrious
lady great compassion before anything else. This is the compassion of the bodhisattvas that
is focussed on sentient beings.

To illustrate what the compassion focussed on dharmas and without a focus relate to, it was
stated:Just like the moon reflected in a rippling pond,They see them waver, empty of inherent
being.To this one should add the line, ‘I bow to such compassion.’ In a pool of limpid
water slightly rippled by a mild breeze, the image of the moon keeps breaking up on the surface
of what supports its reflection, and the combination of these two is visible as a clearly
perceptible thing. The supreme ones see that these two facets illustrate the nature
of things, namely moment-by-moment impermanence and absence of intrinsic nature. In the same
way, bodhisattvas governed by compassion see that beings dwelling in the vast blue water
of ignorance filling the ocean of the view of identity (satkāyadṛṣṭi) stirred by the winds
of mistaken concepts, appearing in front of them as reflections of their individual karma,
moment-by-moment encounter the suffering of impermanence and are empty of inherent existence.
The bodhisattvas then develop the wish to help them fully attain the state of awakening,
which is like the annihilator of the suffering of impermanence they undergo with respect
to these two facts; which is a perfect source of the nectar of the sublime Dharma;
which is characterised by a total reversal of all mistaken concepts; and is the true friend
of all the world.8 Having bowed to their compassion focussed on sentient beings, focussed
on dharmas and without a focus …

…, wishing then to speak of the ten divisions of the awakening mind of bodhisattvas, regarding
the first mind of awakening:

The victor’s offspring filled with these compassionate thoughtsWill feel compelled to rescue
each and every one. (1.4)They dedicate just like Samantabhadra prayed,Established on the
Joyous which is called the first.The various levels encompassed by the bodhisattvas’ compassion
of undefiled wisdom receive the name grounds (bhūmi) since they are supports for qualities.
We designate ten particular grounds with the names Joyous (pramudita) and so forth,
not because there is any distinction with respect to their actual nature, but based on there
being an increasing number of qualities, attainment of superior powers, advancement in
the perfections such as generosity, and flourishing maturation. As stated:Even the wise
cannot express or seeThe path a bird takes in the sky;And likewise, the grounds of the victor
heirsCannot be expressed, much less heard about.9The bodhisattva ground Joyous is the
initial resolve of the bodhisattvas, while the last and tenth resolve is Cloud of Dharma.

As explained, the mind of the bodhisattva is at this point seized by the special compassion
which sees the lack of inherent nature of beings, and filled with these compassionate thoughts
they dedicate just like Samantabhadra prayed. Thus it is given the name Joyous, indicating
that this result has non-dual wisdom as its cause, and is considered the first. Generating
the resolve for the first time, the bodhisattva makes ten innumerable hundred thousand
aspirations, such as those expressed in the Ten Great Aspirations, and all of these are
included within the Bodhisattva Samantabhadra’s Aspiration. In order to include every aspiration
without omission, the Aspiration of Samantabhadra is here singled out.

Just as, in the vehicle of the hearers we designate eight types of hearers who have entered
or abide in the result,10 in the Greater Vehicle as well we have the bodhisattvas’ ten bodhisattva
grounds. And just as we do not consider that someone having reached the stage of
propensity for definite separation11 (nirvedhabhagīya) has reached the stage of entry into
the first result, the same is true for the potential bodhisattvas. As taught in the Cloud
of Jewels Sutra:The state just before the attainment of the first ground, having the nature
of magnificent aspirations aimed at great conduct, is a ground where the bodhisattva has
not yet generated the mind of awakening.12It continues, explaining about this instance of
aspiring towards practice:O son of good family. Take the example of a universal monarch,
who though he transcends the ranks of humans, has not yet reached the ranks of gods. Just
so, a bodhisattva can be completely beyond worldly people, hearers and solitary buddhas,
without having reached the ultimate ground of the bodhisattva.13

As they enter Joyous, the first ground:At present, signifying what they have attained,The epithet
of bodhisattva is now theirs. (1.5)Having attained this mind they are in every respect
beyond the level of ordinary beings, at this stage only referred to as bodhisattvas and
nothing else, because they are now noble beings. As stated for instance in the Illustrious
Lady in Two Thousand Five Hundred Lines:Bodhisattva is an epithet for sattvas14 whose insight
has awakened (anubuddha), who have gained realisation (buddha) and understanding (jñāna)
of all dharmas. How do they understand them? As non-existent (abhūta), unproduced (asaṃbhūta)
and incorrect (vitatha), and not the way immature ordinary beings conceive of them;
not how immature ordinary beings ascertain them. Therefore they are called bodhisattvas,
beings with awakened insight. How so? Awakening is not conceived. Awakening is not accomplished.
Awakening is not ascertained. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. The Tathāgata did not attain
awakening, because no dharmas can be attained. Since no dharmas are ascertained it is called
awakening (bodhi). Likewise, we say, ‘the awakening of Buddha’ – but that actually defies
expression. If, Suvikrāntavikrāmin, when generating the mind of awakening they think, ‘We
shall generate this mind of awakening’, and there is a sense of this awakening being an
existent awakening towards which, ‘We generate this mind’, then they are not called bodhisattvas
but generating sattvas (utpannasattva).15 Why? They are fixated on giving rise to
it. They are focussed on this mind. They are determined to awaken.16

And likewise, among other things it is stated that:Awakening is without characteristics; it
is free from the nature of characteristics. The one for whom this realisation dawns awakens
(bodhi) – but that actually defies expression. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. Since the realisation
of dharmas has dawned, they are called bodhisattvas. But for those, Suvikrāntavikrāmin,
who have not understood these dharmas, who haven’t realised them but still consider themselves
bodhisattvas, the grounds of the bodhisattvas are a long way off. They are far from
the dharmas of bodhisattvas, and are deceiving the world of gods, humans and demigods by using
the name bodhisattva. O Suvikrāntavikrāmin. If a word was all it took to be a bodhisattva,
all sentient beings would be bodhisattvas. Thus, Suvikrāntavikrāmin, the grounds of
the bodhisattva is more than just a term.17

And when gaining the mind of awakening thus described, not only are they solely referred to
by the term bodhisattva, but also:They’ve taken birth as kin of the tathāgatas;Their fetters
three have thus been utterly dispelled.These bodhisattvas now endowed with utmost joyAre
able to make hundred world systems vibrate. (1.6)The bodhisattva has taken birth as kin
of the tathāgatas, since they now transcend all the levels of ordinary beings, hearers and
solitary buddhas, and have begun to follow the path leading to the ground of the tathāgatas,
Fully Illumined. Seeing at this point directly the lack of a personal self, their fetters
three have thus been utterly dispelled – the view of identity, doubt and the thought that
moral discipline and religious observance is the most excellent thing – since these will
not now reappear. When one does not see the actual reality of things, one imputes a self,
adopting the identity view; and one entertains doubt, considering the possibility of taking
others paths. Not otherwise. Arriving at certainty18 (niścayapraveśa) they gain the accompanying
qualities and are free from faults that conflict with the grounds. With that,
an extraordinary sense of delight is born, and with this increasing joyous experience the
most supreme joy becomes theirs. And it is because this exceptional joy rises up that this
ground receives the name Joyous. They are able to shake a hundred world-systems.

As they’re progressing ever higher, ground to ground,The paths to lower states have now been
fully barred,All ordinary states of being brought to close,And they are now akin to the eighth
noble one. (1.7)As they gain familiarity with the Dharma thus realised, and are greatly
inspired as they progress to the second ground and further, they are progressing ever
higher, ground to ground. In short, just as noble stream-enterers are free from faults and
gain qualities when realising the noble Dharma that agrees with them, the bodhisattvas realising
the grounds gain the accompanying qualities and eliminate faults. The example of the
stream-enterer is here employed to clarify this.

Concerning these bodhisattvas:Though just the first taste of complete awakening,In strength
of merit they now conquer and surpassThe solitary buddhas and the Sage-speech born;This presents
a further distinction in line with the following statements found in the noble Liberation
of Maitreya:O son of good family. It is like the example of a prince, who immediately
after birth carries the signs of royalty, and by virtue of his supreme hereditary rank
surpasses everyone even among the senior and most important ministers. Just so, as soon as
the novice bodhisattva has given rise to the mind of awakening he is born into the family
of tathāgatas, the kings of Dharma, and through the power of his awakening mind and compassion
surpasses the hearers and solitary buddhas who have long practiced pure conduct. … O
son of good family. It is like the example of a fledgling of the mighty garuḍa that soon
after birth possesses a powerful wing-thrust and an immaculate eye-sight that cannot be rivalled
by any mature birds belonging to other species. Just so, when the mighty garuḍa youngling
bodhisattva gives rise to the initial mind of awakening and is born into the family-lineage
of the powerful sky-soaring garuḍa tathāgatas, the powerful wing-thrust of his courageous
mind dedicated to the state of complete omniscience and his immaculate eye-sight
of altruism cannot be matched by any of the hearers or solitary buddhas who have practiced
renunciation for a hundred thousand aeons.19

Unrivalled in their insight too on Far Advanced. (1.8)As stated in the noble Ten Grounds:O victor-heirs.
Take as example the prince who once born into the royal family holds royal characteristics.
The status of royalty is such that his birth alone is enough to surpass the
whole assembly of ministers, even though he does not do so in terms of analytical ability.
But once he has come of age and developed his analytical abilities, he will completely surpass
the ministers in every way. O victor-heirs. The same is the case for bodhisattvas.
Once they have developed this resolve they surpass the hearers and solitary buddhas in terms
of their altruistic determination, even though they do not do so in terms of analytical
ability. But bodhisattvas dwelling on the seventh bodhisattva-ground completely surpass the
hearers and solitary buddhas in every way due to the exalted nature of their wisdom’s range.20One
should take this as saying that it is only once having reached Far Advanced that
bodhisattvas surpass hearers and solitary buddhas also in terms of analytical ability. Those
on the lower grounds do not.

This scriptural citation clearly states that hearers and solitary buddhas too understand the
lack of intrinsic nature of all dharmas. If this was not the case, and they did not have
the realisation of the absence of intrinsic nature of things, they would be surpassed in terms
of analytical abilities by the bodhisattva with the initial resolve just as is the case
for those free from worldly desires; just like non-Buddhists, they would not abandon all
subtle propensities (anuśaya) that perpetuate the three realms, because of still mistakenly
perceiving that forms and so forth have intrinsic nature; and they would not even realise
the selflessness of the person, because imputation of a self relies on observing the aggregates.

As stated in the Precious Garland:As long as one clings to the aggregatesThere will be clinging
to an ‘I’.And with clinging to ‘I’ there is karma,Which leads to birth.This threefold
path has no beginning, middle or end.It revolves by virtue of these reciprocal causesJust
like a circle created byThe arc of a whirling firebrand.But when it can’t be found to come
from itself,From others, or both at any point in the three times,This self-clinging ceases,And
with it karma and birth.21It continues:Just like the eye is mistakenWhen it perceives
the firebrand’s arc,The faculties too perceiveThe objects of the present.The faculties and
the sense-objectsAre held to be of the nature of the five elements,But since the individual
elements are unreal,These are also in fact unreal.If the elements were held to be distinct,It
would follow that fire could burn without fuel.If they merge they lose their defining
characteristics.The same conclusion applies to the other elements.Since elements are
unreal in either case,Their combination too is unreal.And since their combination is unreal,Form
is also in actual fact unreal.Since in and of themselves, consciousness,Feeling, perception
and formation tooAre in every way unreal in terms self-nature,They are ultimately
unreal.Just as one assumes that it is happinessWhen suffering is removed,And when happiness
is preventedOne has the impression of suffering,This lack of any intrinsic natureEliminates
the thirst to find happinessAnd the desire to be free from suffering –Those who see this
are therefore freed.You may ask, ‘Who sees this?’Conventionally, we say it’s the mind.But
without mental events there is no mind.Being unreal, we do not assert that it exists.When
one gains a proper understandingOf the unreality of beings,There is no basis, nothing
to adopt, one transcends,22Just like a fire that has run out of fuel.23

One may ask, ‘Is it just the bodhisattvas who see this lack of intrinsic nature?’ It is not
so, because these statements were made with respect to hearers and solitary buddhas. How can
one deduce that? Because it is only after these statements that the bodhisattvas are spoken
of, starting with:The bodhisattva also sees this,And is determined to reach awakening.It
is only because of his compassionThat he remains in existence until awakening.And in the
sutras that were taught to the hearers it is stated among other things that:Form is like
a mass of foam,Feeling as a water-bubble,Perception similar to a mirage,Formations are like
plantain trees,Consciousness like an illusion –Thus spoke The Sun’s Kinsman.24In this
way, compounded phenomena (saṃskāra) are scrutinised by means of examples such as a mass of
foam, water-bubbles, a mirage, the plantain tree’s trunk and an illusion.

Explaining exactly this point, the master said:According to the Greater Vehicle,Emptiness is
non-arising; for the others it’s destruction.But destruction and non-arisingShould in fact
be considered the same.25Similarly:In the Instructions to KātyāyanaThe Illustrious One refutedBoth
existence and non-existenceThrough his knowledge of entities and non-entities.26Some
might think, ‘If the selflessness of dharmas is also taught in the vehicle of the hearers,
then the teachings of the Greater Vehicle are redundant.’ Such a way of thinking is
seen to contradict both reasoning and scripture. The teachings of the Greater Vehicle are
not solely concerned with the selflessness of dharmas, but also with the bodhisattvas’ grounds,
perfections, aspirations, great compassion and so forth, with dedication, the two accumulations
and the inconceivable nature of reality (dharmatā).

As stated in the Precious Garland:In the vehicle of the hearers there is no mentionOf the aspiration
of the bodhisattva,Nor of dedicating one’s activities –How could one then become
a bodhisattva?…In the sutras there is no mentionOf following the bodhisattva conduct.But this
is explained in the Greater Vehicle,Which should therefore be accepted by the wise.27Also,
as they clarify the selflessness of dharmas, there is good reason for the teachings of
the Greater Vehicle, since this is taught there extensively. In the hearer vehicle the selflessness
of dharmas receives only a very succinct treatment. As in the words of the master:If
featurelessness is not realised,You taught there will be no liberation.And thus, in
the Greater VehicleYou taught this exhaustively.28We will digress no further. Those whose
minds are not very disturbed should be able to gain recognition of the actual reality through
this by themselves, and we therefore continue with the general explanation.

To bring the realisation of full buddhahood,The first which now is stressed is generosity.Among
the ten named generosity, moral discipline, tolerance, diligence, meditative absorption,
intelligence, skilful means, aspirations, powers and wisdom, for the bodhisattva on the
Joyous ground it is the perfection of generosity which is mainly emphasised; but this does
not mean that the others are absent. Generosity is the initial cause of omniscience.

And when they even give their own flesh graciously,From that one may infer what cannot be perceived.
(1.9)Although the qualities of the bodhisattva may not now be apparent, their realisation
and so forth may be readily inferred through observing their extraordinary willingness
to give away both external and internal possessions, just as for instance fire is inferred
from smoke.

Just as the generosity of bodhisattvas is the initial cause of buddhahood and an indication
of qualities that are not apparent, it is also said to alleviate the suffering of ordinary
beings, hearers and solitary buddhas, and be the cause for the attainment of lasting happiness.
In order to express this, it was said that:All beings long for only happiness,But people
will not be content when poor.And seeing that it is what fosters wealthThe Sage would
first teach generosity. (1.10)To the extent that remedies for hunger, thirst, sickness,
cold and so forth alleviate suffering, they bring about worldly happiness. But as long as
there is mistaken clinging to and concepts of a continuous identity, this is not a type of
happiness free from distress, and one remains fully entangled within the world. Any happiness
connected with this type of craving for happiness is by its very nature merely an alleviation
of suffering, and it is the coveted resources that act as this suffering’s remedy;
without such fundamentally mistaken resources it will not be experienced. Seeing how the
objects that cause for the alleviation of suffering do not come about in the absence of an
accumulation of merit connected with generosity, the Illustrious One, knowing perfectly
the basic sentiment of every single being, gave the teachings on generosity as the very first,
before all the teachings on moral discipline and so forth.

