Just as the bodhisattvas of this ground gain a fully authentic perfection of tolerance, likewise:This
ground is where the victor heirs now entertainAbsorptions and the supernormal sense
powers.Attachment, anger – these have been completely spent.They’re able to subdue mundane
desirous love. (3.11)When absorptions (dhyāna) are mentioned, the word absorption is
illustrative, and also refers to the equilibrium states (samāpatti) and the immeasurables
(apramāṇa).

As stated in the context of the third bodhisattva ground:The bodhisattvas dwelling on the bodhisattva
ground Luminous are separated from desires, are separated from negative non-virtuous
ways, and by virtue of deliberation (vitarka) and judgement (vicāra) attain and abide
in the first absorption of joy (prīti) and bliss (sukha), emerging from separation. With
the cessation of deliberation and judgement, developing inner serenity, the mind becomes one-pointed
and they attain and abide in the second absorption of joy and bliss, emerging from
a concentration free from deliberation and judgement. With the cessation of desire for
joy, dwelling in equanimity, being mindful and aware, there is physical bliss and they attain
and abide in the third absorption beyond joy, expressed by the noble ones as the equanimity
of dwelling in the bliss of whatever is thought of. Abandoning bliss, abandoning former
suffering, comfort and discomfort disappears and they attain and abide in the fourth
absorption of perfectly pure equanimity and awareness that is neither happiness nor suffering.1These
are the four meditative absorptions.

Concerning the four formless equilibria it states:Passing entirely beyond perceptions of form,
perceptions of impediments disappear, they do not entertain perceptions of variety, and
the thought ‘infinite space’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of infinite
space. Passing entirely beyond the sense field of infinite space, the thought ‘infinite
consciousness’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of infinite consciousness.
Passing entirely beyond the sense field of infinite consciousness, the thought ‘nothing
whatsoever’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of nothing whatsoever.
Passing entirely beyond the sense field of nothing whatsoever, the thought ‘neither consciousness
nor non-consciousness’ occurs, as they attain and abide in the sense field of neither
consciousness nor non-consciousness.2These are the four formless equilibria.

Concerning the four immeasurables it states:They attain and dwell in a broad mind possessed
of love that is vast, non-dual, immeasurable and not hostile; that entertains no rivalry,
and is without obscurations and malice; that is all-encompassing, extending throughout the
expanse of phenomena (dharmadhātu), reaching to the limits of the element of space, spreading
throughout the universe.3The same as above applies to a broad mind possessed of compassion,
joy and equanimity.

Concerning the five supercognitions it states:They enjoy various types of miraculous abilities.
They can make the ground tremble; transform from one to many, and from many to one; appear
and disappear; pass directly through walls; pass directly through barriers; even mountains
they can pass through without impediment, as if they were empty space. They can move
through space in the cross-legged posture, just like a winged bird. They can emerge from
and sink into the ground as if it was water. They can move on water without sinking, as if
it was solid ground. They can produce smoke or fire as if they themselves were a great bonfire.
They can make great torrents of water emerge from their bodies as if they were a great
cloud; and with that water they can quell the blazing fires that scorch, burn and incinerate
the entire trichiliocosm. They can stretch out their hand and touch the most powerful
and mighty moon and sun, and their physical powers reach even up to the world of Brahma.4Such
is their supercognition of miraculous ability.

Since the purified faculty of their divine ear surpasses the human state, they can hear the
sounds of gods and humans alike. They can hear sounds however subtle or vast, far away or
near, even those of gnats, mosquitos, bees and flies.5Such is their supercognition of divine
ear.They mentally, and with precision, gain knowledge of the minds of other sentient beings
and people. They know desirous states of mind perfectly as desirous states of mind. They
know non-desirous states of mind perfectly as non-desirous states of mind; and the same
for those filled with anger and those without anger; those filled with confusion and those
without confusion; those filled with afflictions and those without afflictions; the ones
who are limited, vast, great or limitless; who are gathered, expanded, concentrated or not
concentrated; who are liberated and who are not liberated; who have faults and are without
faults. They know with precision the coarse-minded to be coarse-minded. They know with
precision that those without coarse minds are not coarse-minded. In this way, they mentally
and with precision gain knowledge of the minds of other sentient beings and people.6Such
is their supercognition of knowing the minds of others.

They can recall many previous states. They remember one lifetime. They remember two lifetimes,
three, four, five, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, fifty, a hundred, a thousand. They remember
many hundreds of lifetimes, many thousands of lifetimes, many hundreds of thousands of
lifetimes, many billions of lifetimes, many hundred quintillions of lifetimes; aeons of destruction,
aeons of creation, many aeons of destruction and creation. They remember a hundred
aeons. They remember a thousand aeons. They remember a hundred thousand aeons, ten million
aeons, a billion aeons, ten billion aeons, a trillion aeons, up to ten quintillion aeons.
They remember many previous states, their characteristics, evidence and reasons, thinking,
‘At one point I was named so-and-so, belonged to such-and-such a family, to this or
that social class, ate such-and-such types of food, reached such-and-such an age, remained
for this or that long, had such-and-such experiences of happiness and suffering, and when
I died I took such-and-such a rebirth. Again, when I passed from that state, I was born
here.’7Such is their supercognition of recalling previous states.

With their pure divine eye surpassing human capacity, they see sentient beings dying and being
born, of good character and negative character, those going to fortunate states and those
going to unfortunate states, those who are good and those who are bad. They know with precision
the type of karma sentient beings carry: ‘Indeed, these sentient beings engage in
negative physical acts, negative verbal acts, negative mental acts. They have wrong views
and disparage the noble ones. Having devoted themselves to karmas of wrong view, when their
body perishes and they die, they will fall into lower states of misery and be born as hell
beings.’ And: ‘Indeed, these sentient beings engage in good physical acts, good verbal
acts and good mental acts. They have good views and do not disparage the noble ones. Having
devoted themselves to karmas of good view, when their body perishes and they die, they
will go to the higher states of happiness and be born among the gods.’ These things they know.
Likewise, with their pure divine eye surpassing human capacity, they see sentient beings
dying, being born, of good character and negative character … (and so forth), they see
all this, their characteristics, evidence and reasons. They know with precision the type
of karma sentient beings carry.Although they enter and emerge from these absorptions, liberations,
concentrations and equilibria, if they see a situation where the limbs of awakening
may be fulfilled, directing their attention towards that, they are born there by the power
of their aspirations. Only then, not under the influence of such states, do they take
rebirth there. Why? Because such bodhisattvas possess a stream of mind accomplished in skilful
means.8Hence, at this point the absorptions and supercognitions arise for the bodhisattva.

How then, are worldly attachment and aversion permanently and completely exhausted? The word
and serves to include what is not explicitly mentioned, meaning that delusion is also completely
exhausted. How so? About this the sutra states:As they realise that there is no transference
and no destruction since all dharmas rely on conditions, all the bonds of desire
are that much weakened; all the bonds of form, bonds of existence and bonds of ignorance
are weakened. The bonds related to view have already been discarded. The bodhisattvas dwelling
on the bodhisattva ground Luminous abandon the faults of attachment that would not decrease
throughout many hundreds of aeons, many thousands of aeons, many hundred thousands
of aeons, many ten millions of aeons, up to many ten quintillion aeons. They abandon the
faults of aversion that would not decrease. They abandon faults of delusion that would not
decrease.9In this way, their attachment, aversion and delusion are wholly exhausted.

How is it that they are able to permanently destroy worldly desirous attachment? As stated:O
victor heirs. This has been a short presentation of Luminous, the third bodhisattva ground.
The bodhisattvas who dwell here mostly become kings of the gods and powerful lords of the
gods10 . Refined and foremost when it comes to mastering the means of averting sentient
beings’ desirous attachment, they are skilled in extracting beings from the mire of attachment.11In
this way, the victor heirs have the power to overcome the world’s desirous attachment.

Thus, having indicated how bodhisattvas on the third bodhisattva ground undoubtedly attain the
pure perfection of tolerance, the absorptions, immeasurables, equilibria, supercognitions
and the complete exhaustion of attachment and so forth, in order to clarify the particular
support of the three perfections up to the perfection of tolerance, their nature as accumulations,
and the attained result that is established, it was said:The Sugata would chiefly
recommend these three,Of giving and so forth, to lay practitioners.And as they are the
merit-type of gathering,They bring about the buddha in corporeal form. (3.12)Although only
bodhisattvas may serve as the support for the generosity and so forth explained here, there
is still mention of a twofold division in terms of householders and renunciates. In this
regard, the three dharmas of generosity and so forth, being easier to practice, are mainly
for householders, while diligence, meditative absorption and great intelligence are for
renunciates. Still, it is not the case that one is impossible for the other. The accumulations
that lead to buddhahood are two: the accumulation of merit and the accumulation of
wisdom. The accumulation of merit is comprised of these three perfections, while the accumulation
of wisdom is comprised of meditative absorption and great intelligence. Diligence
is held to be the cause for both. The accumulation of merit is the cause for the form body
of an illustrious complete buddha, the variegated marvellous and unimaginable form with
hundreds of meritorious characteristics. The cause of the body having the nature of dharma,
and characterised by being unborn, is the accumulation of wisdom.

Now, having expressed its greatness in terms of the exaltedness of the support and so forth,
to provide a conclusion to the section on the third bodhisattva ground:On Luminous, where
bodhisattvas stay like suns,The murkiness within themselves has been dispelled.They now intend
to shed all beings of their gloom.The Luminous12 ground is the sun-like state of the
sugata heirs, where the unknowing present in their own being, which constituted an obstacle
to the arising of this state, has been dispelled. Acting as examples, they now wish to
destroy the gloom that blocks the arising of the third ground for others as well. For these
bodhisattvas,But though intense upon this ground, no anger stirs. (3.13)Although they are
as intense13 as the sun when it comes to defeating the gloom of faults that destroy one’s
qualities, they never become angry with individuals filled with defects, the reasons being
their excellent cultivation of tolerance and a mind saturated with compassion.

This concludes the third resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Fourth Ground: Radiant

Now, by way of showing how the perfection of diligence surpasses the perfections of generosity,
moral discipline and tolerance, the fourth resolve is explained:Good qualities come in
the wake of diligence;What brings one stores of merit and intelligence.As this is where their
diligence is burning strong,This ground, the fourth among them, is the Radiant. (4.1)If
one has no enthusiasm for virtuous ways, one will not apply oneself in all manners to generosity
and so forth, thus making it impossible for all the good qualities to arise. With
a formerly established keenness for accumulating good qualities, what has been gained will
increase and what has not been gained becomes achievable. Thus, diligence is the cause
of each and every good quality. That it is the cause of the two accumulations was already
explained above. Being the ground where diligence blazes forth as it refines all one’s good
qualities, this fourth bodhisattva ground is therefore named Radiant (arciṣmatī).

Inquiring further into why it is called ‘Radiant’, the purpose for using this name is now explained:There
now appears for the sugata heirs a lightMore bright than copper, born from cultivation
ofThe thirty-seven factors of enlightenment –On this ground there appears for the
bodhisattvas a glow exceeding the lustre of copper previously explained, and this comes
from their practice of the thirty-seven factors of awakening. Thus, since the fire of genuine
wisdom blazes brightly, this bodhisattva ground is named Radiant. The thirty-seven factors
of awakening are the four applications of mindfulness, the four correct abandonments,
the four miraculous legs, the five faculties, the five powers, the seven limbs of awakening
and the eightfold noble path.

The four applications of mindfulness are taught at length:O victor heirs. The bodhisattva dwelling
on the bodhisattva ground Radiant is assiduous, attentively and mindfully remaining
with the observation of the inner body, abandoning craving and discomfort relating to the
world. He is assiduous, attentively and mindfully remaining with the observation of the outer
body, abandoning craving and discomfort relating to the world. … remaining with the observation
of the inner and outer body … (and so forth, as before). Likewise, he is assiduous,
attentively and mindfully remaining with … inner sensations, outer sensations, and inner
and outer sensations; (and, as before) … with inner thinking, outer thinking, and inner
and outer thinking; … remaining with inner dharmas, outer dharmas, and inner and outer dharmas.14

Concerning the four correct abandonments it is taught:He sets himself a goal, strives, is diligent,
focuses his mind and directs it properly in order not to give rise to negative non-virtuous
dharmas that have not yet arisen. Likewise, he … in order to rid himself of negative
non-virtuous dharmas that have arisen. Likewise, he … in order to give rise to virtuous
dharmas that have not yet arisen. Likewise, he sets himself a goal, strives … in order
to stabilise, keep from diminishing, increase, ensure the future arising and complete perfection
of virtuous dharmas that have arisen.15Concerning the four miraculous legs it is taught:He
cultivates the miraculous leg of the concentration of interest, combined with the
impulse of abandonment, through relying on isolation, relying on freedom from attachment,
relying on extinction and developing renunciation. Likewise, … the miraculous leg of the concentration
of diligence, combined with the impulse of abandonment, … ; … the miraculous
leg of intention, combined with the impulse of abandonment, … ; … the miraculous leg of investigation,
combined with the impulse of abandonment, … .16

Concerning the five faculties it is taught:He cultivates the faculty of faith, relying on isolation
… the faculty of diligence … the faculty of mindfulness … the faculty of concentration
… the faculty of intelligence, relying on isolation, relying on freedom from attachment
… (and so forth, as before).17The five powers are exactly the same as those when the disharmonious
elements have been overcome.Concerning the seven limbs of awakening it is taught:He
cultivates the limb of true awakening that is mindfulness, relying on isolation … the
limb of true awakening that is investigation of dharmas … the limb of true awakening that
is diligence … the limb of true awakening that is joy … the limb of true awakening that
is pliancy … the limb of true awakening that is concentration … the limb of true awakening
that is equanimity, relying on isolation … (and so forth, as before).18

Concerning the eightfold noble path it is taught:He cultivates correct view, relying on isolation,
relying on freedom from attachment, relying on extinction and developing renunciation.
He cultivates correct thought … correct speech … correct action … correct livelihood …
correct exertion … correct mindfulness … correct concentration, relying on isolation … (and
so forth, as before).19

Not only do they on this ground gain a cultivation of the factors of awakening:And any sense
of self is now entirely gone. (4.2)On this ground their view of self is also removed. As
stated:O victor heirs. The bodhisattva dwelling on the bodhisattva ground Radiant is free
from all things related to the identity view: he is freed from all sense of stimulation, conceptualisation,
analysis, sense of permanence, sense of ownership, sense of wealth and sense
of abiding arising through attachment to a self, sentient beings, life, maintenance,
a person, an individual, aggregates, elements and sense fields.20

This concludes the fourth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Fifth Ground: Hard to Conquer

Now, in terms of the fifth resolve:Great beings on this ground so Hard to OvercomeCannot be
conquered even by the demon hordes.The Bodhisattvas dwelling on the fifth bodhisattva ground
cannot be overcome even by the divine child-demons (devaputramāra) dwelling in all the
realms of the world, let alone all other demons subservient to them. That is why this ground
receives the name Hard to Conquer.

It should be recognised of the bodhisattvas that:With excellent absorption these high-minded
onesAre masters in the subtle nature of the truths. (5.1)Now, from among the ten perfections,
it is the perfection of meditative absorption which is foremost. High-minded ones (sumati)
is a reference to noble beings (ārya). Their truths are the truths of the high-minded,
meaning the noble truths. Nature (svabhāva) refers to its true condition (svarūpa). The
nature that is comprehended through exact understanding is the exact nature, and those who
have a subtle understanding of the true condition of the truths of the high-minded are supremely
wise. The four noble truths referred to here are those of suffering, origin, cessation
and path.

But the Illustrious One taught that there are only two truths, namely the relative truth and
the ultimate truth. As stated:The knowers of the world themselves declared,And not by hearsay,
that there are two truths:The relative and the ultimate.There is no such thing as a
third truth.21And from the Middle Way Treatise:The dharma teachings of the buddhasAre based
on two truths:The relative truth of the worldAnd the ultimate truth.22Why then, it may be
asked, do we have these four noble truths as distinct from the two truths? To explain we
would say that, although that is indeed so, it is in order to separately indicate the causal
and resultant aspects of what to adopt and what to reject that the four noble truths have
been related in this manner. The aspect that needs to be rejected is thorough affliction
(saṃkleśa), its result being the truth of suffering and its cause the truth of origin.
The aspect that needs to be adopted is complete purification, its result being the truth of
cessation and the cause for attaining this being the truth of the path. Among these, the
truth of suffering, origin and path are included within the relative truth, while the truth
of cessation is the essential condition of the ultimate truth. Any other truths, whatever
they may be, would likewise certainly also be included within these two truths.

Are there then other truths different from the four truths? Yes, there are. As stated in the
context of the fifth bodhisattva ground:They know with complete accuracy that, ‘This is the
noble truth of suffering’. They know with complete accuracy that, ‘This is the noble truth
of the origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path leading to the cessation
of suffering.’ They are well-versed in the relative truth, well-versed in the ultimate
truth, well-versed in the truth of characteristics, well-versed in the truth of distinctions,
well-versed in the truth of examination, well-versed in the truth of substance, well-versed
in the truth of production, well-versed in the truth of knowing extinction and
non-arising, well-versed in the truth of engaging with the knowledge of the path, and well-versed
in the truth of mastering the progression through all the levels of the bodhisattva
grounds culminating in the wisdom of a tathāgata.

Related to these, accurately satisfying the wishes of other sentient beings, they fully know
the relative truth. Applying themselves accurately to the sole path, they fully know the
ultimate truth. Having realised their own and the shared characteristics, they fully know
the truth of characteristics. Having understood the principles of distinguishing dharmas,
they fully know the truth of distinctions. Having experienced what harms body and mind, they
fully know substances. Having realised the connections involved in migrating, they fully
know rebirth. Having fully pacified all the torments of illness, they fully know extinction
and non-arising. Having mastered non-duality, they fully know how to engage with the knowledge
of the path. Having perfectly assimilated the knowledge of all aspects, they fully
know the truth of achieving the connections up through all the levels of the bodhisattva
grounds culminating in the wisdom of a tathāgata.23

This concludes the fifth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Sixth Ground: Present

