Now, in terms of the third resolve it was said that:A fire burning with the fuel of objects
knownProduces light; this third ground thus receives its name,The Luminous …,Luminous is the
name of the third bodhisattva ground. Why is it the Luminous? This is a literal description.
At this point, the fire of wisdom burns away the fuel of all knowable things without
exception, producing a light that has the nature of pacification, and thus this ground is
described as luminous. With the third resolve:… as here for the sugatas’ heirA copper-glow
appears which is just like the sun. (3.1)Just like the sun at dawn glows like copper, for
the bodhisattva there now appears a similar glow of wisdom.

In order to demonstrate the excellent perfection of tolerance of bodhisattvas who have gained
such effulgent wisdom:If out of baseless fury someone were to comeAnd sever from their body
all their flesh and bone,To torture them, cut piece by piece and take their time,Towards
their butcher tolerance will only grow. (3.2)Since bodhisattvas are heedful of the minds
of others and have such wisdom, they will not physically, verbally or mentally express any
misgivings related to injustices of the three times1 when encountering others’ malice,
and the verse therefore specifies that, ‘If out of baseless fury…’. If such a sentient being
were to cut flesh and bone from the bodhisattva’s body ounce by ounce, pausing and then
starting again, over an extended period of time, not only would the bodhisattva not harbour
any anger for such a butcher, but being aware that the individual by virtue of this evil
act will have to endure the sufferings of hell and so forth, they develop an exceptional
level of tolerance.

Furthermore,When bodhisattvas see that there exists no self,What’s cut, the cutter, time of
cutting and the mode,Phenomena like these appear reflection-like,An insight through which
they are able to forbear. (3.3)Not only are they exceptionally tolerant, seeing how these
negative karmic acts serve as conditions for the perpetrator to experience the suffering of
the hells and so forth, but since these phenomena are also seen to be like reflections,
and since they are free from the concepts of self and mine, they have an extraordinary tolerance.
The word also is used to include this among the causes of their tolerance.

Not only is tolerance a suitable way of practice for bodhisattvas, it is also for others the
very cause of preserving any type of quality. Therefore, to indicate how it is also sensible
for the intolerant to avoid anger:If you resent the one who’s caused you injury,Does your
resentment take away the harm that’s done?To bear a grudge will serve no purpose here
and now,And also brings adversity in lives to come. (3.4)Should an occasion arise for one
to become upset and develop anger towards another for a harm inflicted, since this will not
serve to reverse the harm done, it is pointless to harbour anger against them, as the act
has already been done. Not only does resentment serve no purpose here, it also brings adversity
in the next world, because harbouring enmity will lead to a furthering of unwanted
consequences.

Some will, when experiencing the particular result of a negative act they themselves committed,
entertain the deluded idea that, ‘This other individual is harming me,’ and become angry
with the harm doer. In order to counteract the wish to seek revenge, and triumph over their
harm:The karmic outcome of non-virtue in the pastIs held to be the thing that brings
it to an end.So why then keep on sowing seeds of sufferingBy angrily inflicting harm upon
your foe? (3.5)When someone is overcome by enemies, suffering greatly as their body is subjected
to the harm of sharp weapons, that is the concluding result of acts of killing performed
in the past, and is a cause for avoiding experiencing terrifying resultant maturations
as hell beings, in animal states, in the world of Yama and so forth, and every concurrent
result of remaining afflictions that would result in repugnant physical appearances. Since
it is actually like the final draught of medicine that cures an ailment once and for all,
and the unpleasantness resulting from one’s fury and mistreatment of others has come to
an end, why then further this by doing more harm, bringing upon oneself yet additional causes
that will lead to their results? Therefore, it makes sense to relate to this resultant
suffering with great tolerance, just as when a doctor uses a sharp instrument in order
to cure a certain ailment.

Not only will intolerance as explained above cause a proliferation of unwanted maturing consequences,
it will also eradicate stores of merit accumulated over a long period of time. To
illustrate this it was said that:One’s anger for the victor’s heirs will instantlyDestroy
the virtue gained from generosityAnd discipline throughout a hundred aeons; thusNo evil
is there quite like one’s intolerance. (3.6)If a bodhisattva, a supreme being, were to give
rise to even an instance of anger towards those who have made the resolve of awakening,
and his reaction was triggered by afflictions – regardless of whether or not there was a sense
of certainty about the extraordinary nature of the individual, and regardless of the
justifiability of the perceived fault – that alone would destroy the stores of merit created
by practicing the perfections of generosity and moral discipline, as previously taught,
accumulated throughout a hundred aeons. No need then to mention a non-bodhisattva giving
rise to that towards bodhisattvas. The consequences of such an act is just as impossible to
ascertain as it is impossible to ascertain the weigh all the water in the great oceans using
a scale. Therefore, since it leads to a proliferation of unwanted consequences and is
harmful to one’s virtues, there is no evil greater than intolerance. And thus we find stated:Mañjuśrī.
Enmity is called ‘enmity’ since it is the enemy that completely destroys virtues
accumulated throughout a hundred aeons. That is why enmity is called ‘enmity’.2

Furthermore, of the intolerant, those who are not able to cause harm to others only bring destruction
upon themselves, while those who are able but have no compassion, bring destruction
upon both themselves and others. And when reborn,It fouls one’s features, steers one to
unholy ones.Deprives one of the means to tell what’s right from wrong.And later, when having
left this conducive state,Intolerance will send one straight to lower states.

If these are the faults of intolerance, what are then the qualities of tolerance, its opposite?The
qualities of patience are their opposites. (3.7)Forbearance makes one beautiful, it
grants esteemAmong the holy, makes one morally adept;In future lives one will be human or
divine,And every negativity will disappear. (3.8)It should be recognised that these qualities
of tolerance are the opposite of the faults of intolerance that were mentioned.

Therefore,The common beings and the victor heirs who seeThe faults of enmity and patience’s
qualities,Should shun intolerance and always try to haveForbearance, something that is praised
by noble ones. (3.9)Enmity and tolerance refers to having enmity and showing tolerance,
and faults and qualities refer to the related faults and qualities respectively.3 Here,
the words have been combined in the line the faults and qualities of enmity and tolerance.
By appreciating the faults of enmity here described, and their opposites which are the qualities
of tolerance, one should strive to avoid intolerance, and at all times maintain only
an attitude of tolerance.

Now, to show the divisions of tolerance as a perfection:Though dedicated for complete awakening,It’s
still mundane if the three reference points remain.Even if fully dedicated to buddhahood,
if there is a presence of the three parts – a tolerance, someone being tolerant and
a sentient being towards whom one is tolerant – that tolerance is labeled a mundane perfection
of tolerance.When free from these three references, the Buddha taughtThe same to be
perfection that transcends the world. (3.10)

