Similarly, one should understand thatIt’s similar to cataract-inflicted eyesWhen spirits see
a river’s water being pus.It was previously explained that, ‘The mind sees hairs through
the influence of this disease …,’1 and any other similar cases may be considered along the
same lines; but we shall desist from elaborating more for now.In short, please understand
that, just as what you knowHas no existence, neither does the mind itself. (6.71)One should
come to recognise that just as knowable objects have no inherent existence, the mind too
that entertains images of knowable objects is in and of itself un-produced. As stated:Without
a knowing there’s no known;And lacking that, no consciousness.Hence you declared that
knowing andThe known lack inherent existence.2Similarly,Consciousness is like an illusion
–Thus spoke The Sun’s Kinsman.And what it perceives is likewiseCertainly like illusory things.3Those
who are seized by this consciousness-claiming madness4 and deny external objects,
are sure to plunge into the ravine of self-hood, and must therefore be treated by noble
compassionate practitioners with an excellent and harsh mantric cure of scripture and reasoning.

Thus, having shown how there cannot be consciousness without external objects, in order to reject
the position that it simply must exist, it is said:And if detached from subject-object
there could beDependent nature, empty of duality,Then who would know of its existence?
Just to say,‘It’s there but not perceived,’ is quite unreasonable. (6.72)If a dependent nature
empty of so-called apprehended and apprehender exists, through what cognition do you
apprehend its existence? It is untenable that it apprehends itself, since it is contradictory
for something to direct its act upon itself: the blade of a sword cannot cut itself; the
tip of a finger cannot touch itself; even the strongest and most dextrous athlete isn’t
able to climb onto his own shoulders; fire cannot burn itself; and an eye cannot look at
itself. Another cognition cannot be apprehending it since that would conflict with your own
tenets; if cognition was the object of another cognition, one could then say that this undermines
the sense of cognition only. Hence there is no way whatsoever that there can be
an apprehender of it; and that which cannot be apprehended cannot exist.

Now they reply, ‘It isn’t actually a case of another apprehending something else, but it has
reflexive awareness. And since reflexive awareness apprehends itself, that shows it to be
existent.’ To show how this can’t be, we explain:It isn’t proven to experience itself.It
is unproven that it can so-called ‘apprehend itself.’There are those who cite the Sautrāntika
position in order to prove reflexive awareness: ‘When a fire is kindled it will simultaneously
illumine itself together with vases and other things without distinction. And words
signify both themselves and a referent. Similarly, when consciousness occurs it can fully
discern itself and objects without distinction. Hence, reflexive awareness most certainly
exists.‘Though unwilling, one must by necessity accept reflexive awareness. Otherwise,
when remembering the experience, “I saw …,” one wouldn’t then remember both the object as
well as the experience, “I saw it.” Why? The memory would be of the experienced object, while
the knowing of it would not have been experienced and could not then be remembered.‘As
long as awareness is not reflexive it cannot be experienced. And that there is another cognition
experiencing it is unreasonable. Why? If the cognition experiencing it is other, the
consequence will be that of infinite regress. If you accept that immediately following
one cognition distinguishing the colour blue, there is a consciousness distinguishing that,
one would need yet another experiencer of the cognition of the cognition of blue; and then
yet another again; leading to the fault of infinite regress.‘And it can’t be that cognition
discerns something separate from it, since then all strings of awareness would be objects
of distinct consciousnesses, and sentient beings only have a single stream of consciousness.
It is like a stack of a hundred blue lotus-petals being pierced; consciousness engages
with things in succession, but so rapidly that it appears to be happening simultaneously.5
Hence, to avoid the fault of infinite regress one must necessarily accept reflexive
awareness.‘With that, both objects involved when subsequently remembering the thought “I saw
…” will be accounted for. But if the nature of cognition isn’t known by reflexive awareness,
it’s illogical that its object can be remembered. And so, as the subsequent memory “I
saw…” appears to one’s cognition, it may be inferred that the trigger for the cognitive
experience of a subsequent memory containing both these objects must have been an experience
of its own nature and the nature of the object. The subsequent memory proves the experience
of oneself; and when experience of oneself exists, the dependent nature exists. You asked,
“What would then know of its existence?”6 This is the answer.’To show that this is illogical,
it was said:It isn’t proven to experience itself.And if you say a later memory is
proof,You’re giving something that is unproven as proof;And what’s not proven cannot function
as a proof. (6.73)If this is the proof they now present to substantiate it, since memory
is impossible in that it’s produced neither from self nor from other, how could the unproven
memory prove the unproven reflexive awareness? Even in terms of worldly conventions
it would be impossible for memory to be the result of reflexive awareness. How so? If, as
in the case of fire, cognition is used to prove reflexive awareness – and because of its
presence, like fire is deduced from smoke, one is to be convinced of its existence via the
subsequent occurrence of memory – since this reflexive awareness remains something unproven,
how could memory, the result of reflexive awareness and something that doesn’t occur
if reflexive awareness doesn’t exist, exist? One can’t be certain of the presence of a water-crystal
gem just from seeing water, or a fire-crystal gem just from seeing fire, because
even without these water may be the result of such phenomena as rain, and fire may be produced
for instance by rubbing sticks together. In the same way, this shows that memory may
arise in the absence of reflexive awareness. And therefore, since memory as a result of
reflexive awareness is non-existent without it, you’re giving something unproven as proof.
In proving reflexive awareness, this unproven term ‘memory’ has no relevance as evidence
– just like thinking of sound’s impermanence as something perceived by the eyes.

But say we dispense with such analysis:But let’s assume that self-awareness is affirmed.That
memory remembers it is still unsound,Because it’s other, like an unknown in one’s mind.This
argument will conquer any counterclaim. (6.74)If we do say that cognition is aware of itself
and the object, it is still illogical for a remembering cognition to remember them,
because the remembering cognition is accepted as other in relation to the cognition that experienced
the object. The reflexive awareness and experience of the object that happened
in Maitreya’s mind will not be remembered by Upagupta, because he didn’t experience them.
Similarly, seeing as they are other, it would be just like an unknown mind appearing to oneself,
and a subsequent consciousness taking place within a stream of mind cannot therefore
have that memory, because it didn’t experience that cognition and object.Now, one may think
that such a memory can exist, since this is a case of a single continuum where things
have a causal relationship. But this too is not the case because we have an argument which
defeats any objection. The argument of stating, ‘Since they are other …,’ will utterly defeat
any counterclaims such as, ‘They are part of the same continuum,’ or, ‘They are in a
causal relationship,’ and so on. Since a moment of recollecting cognition would come about
subsequent to the experience, it is something other; and being in that way just the same
as having a cognition of another stream of mind, we may say that it isn’t of a single continuum
as the cognition that experienced, or in a causal relationship, and so forth. So this
argument of stating that they are other is a sweeping refutation.

They might then ask, ‘How do you explain it?’ To clarify:For us, the one who has the memory
is notDistinct from he who had experience of something.To think, ‘I saw,’ is therefore memory
to us,As is the way conventional worldly people think. (6.75)I have already explained
in relation to the experience of an object, how between the cognition that experienced the
object and the cognition that remembers there cannot be otherness. And since, when there
has been an experience, the rememberer is not another, it isn’t the case that the cognition
which remembers that experience is not the experiencer, and the memory can therefore appear
with the object. Since it isn’t the case that the discernment of the experiencing cognition
isn’t the discernment of the rememberer, one can have the thought, ‘I saw….’ This is
also the worldly viewpoint, which shouldn’t be subjected to rigorous analysis, since the
conventions of the world operate on false premises.

This being the case:And so, as self-awareness cannot be the case,What is perceiving your dependent
nature then?The actor, act and object cannot be the same,And thus to apprehend itself
makes little sense. (6.76)An awareness thinking, ‘I cognise myself,’ implies that it itself
is the thing acted upon, while the cognition, the actor, is also itself. And as its act
is also not then separate, it follows that the actor, the acted upon and the act would
be the same. These are however not seen to be the same, just like the wood-cutter, the wood
and the act of cutting are not the same. Since reflexive awareness cannot therefore exist,
it doesn’t apprehend itself. As stated in the Descent Onto Langka:Just as a sword does
not cutIts own blade; and a fingertipCannot touch itself; the same appliesTo the mind perceiving
itself.7

Therefore, as reflexive awareness does not exist:If, even though it is by nature unproducedAnd
isn’t known, dependent nature can exist,How has the barren woman’s son offended themThat
he should suffer this denial of being real? (6.77)As was demonstrated above, a dependent
nature can be neither self- nor other-produced, and is likewise shown to be something that
can’t be known. And if you do accept the existence of a dependent nature that is by nature
unproduced and unknowable, why should you then not also accept the existence of things
that have the same status as this dependent nature? Has the barren woman’s son harmed you
in any way? A barren woman’s son too may be described as utterly unfathomable, an ineffable
object of the noble ones’ wisdom8 , so you have to accept his existence!

If it is indeed an existent dependent nature which is, as they posit, ’… the cause for things
that are but imputations…,’9 then logically:When this dependent nature can’t exist at all,Then
how can it be causing relative events?The thinking being that a cause for the relative
does not then exist in the slightest. And so, for them there is nothing that can actually
cause worldly conventional reality. How terrible!When so obsessed with substance, our
opponents willJust gainsay every normal worldly principle. (6.78)Foolishly clinging to one
part of substantial reality is like pouring water into the unfired earthenware pot of the
dependent nature. Due to their ignorant ways they find that they destroy everything: i.e.
worldly principles that are only sound from the worldly perspective – commands such as sit!,
go!, do!, cook! and so forth – as well as anything encompassed by material form, sensation
and so forth. With that, nothing but failure lies ahead, and no good result will transpire.

And so, in their folly, these teachers insist on a path they themselves conceptually fabricate.
But,There is no other method that will lead to peaceApart from noble master Nāgārjuna’s
way.How so? Since,But they stray from the truths, the real and relative –One gains not liberation
when ignoring these. (6.79)

And why will disregarding these two hinder liberation? To explain:Conventional truth works as
a means to reach an end.The ultimate is like the end one tries to reach.But those who do
not see how these should be discernedAre led by faulty fancies down mistaken paths. (6.80)As
stated in the noble Absorption Revealing Reality:The knowers of the world themselves declared,And
not by hearsay, that there are two truths:The relative and the ultimate.There
is no such thing as a third truth.That beings may benefit from developingFaith in the bliss-gone
ones,For beings’ sake the Victor taughtThe relative to aid the world.Relatively the
Lion of Men wouldIdentify six classes of beings:Hell-beings, animals and spirits,Demigods,
humans and gods.You, so incomparable, taught about beingsOf the world in all their distinctions:In
terms of social rank, the high and low,As citizens, the rich and the poor,As slaves
and servants,Men, women and neuters.The wise who have understood relative truthTeach
in this way to aid the world.Cyclic beings drawn to these statesAre driven by the eight concerns
of beings:Gain and loss, fame and disrepute,Praise and blame, pleasure and pain.When
success is gained attachment grows,While encountering loss upsets their minds;The rest may
be similarly represented.These eight sicknesses cause constant harm.Do understand that
their judgement is mistakenWho profess the relative to be the ultimate.Those who say the repulsive
is appealing,Suffering is pleasure, who claim an inherent selfWhere there is no self,
who say the impermanentIs permanent; they hold to signs who are thus inclined,And when
learning of the doctrine of the SugataThey will fear it, and lacking understanding reject
it.And those who reject the teachings of the SugataWill suffer unbearably in the realms
of hell.Immature children who unwisely pursue pleasureWill endure abundant sufferings.Only
those who do not err, but understandThe teachings that benefit the world,Can shed them like
a worn-out serpent skin,Pass beyond existence and find peace.‘All phenomena lack inherent
existence,Are empty and signless – that is the ultimate.’Those who hear this and rejoice,Will
find the unsurpassed awakening.10Victorious One, you who see the lack of skandhas,The
absence of all elements and sense fields,That this house of faculties lacks all identity,O
Sage, you see all things to be like this.11So how can there ever be liberation for those
separated from the relative and ultimate truths? Hence, these proponents of consciousness
certainly stray, following mistaken pathways due to their erroneous ideas.To teach the
conventional truth is a method. As stated:What is heard and what is taughtIs the inexpressible
dharma –Nothing expressed apart from superimpositions,But heard and taught nonetheless.12Only
by basing oneself on the conventional truth can the ultimate be taught. And by understanding
the teachings on the ultimate, the ultimate state can be attained. As stated in
the Treatise:Without relying on the conventionalThe ultimate cannot be indicated.Without
relying on the ultimateTranscendence cannot be reached.13To teach the ultimate is what the
method aims to do, what it should result in; meaning that it is what is aimed for, the result,
that to be attained, or what should be understood.

