One may then ask, ‘What is this self, the reference point for the view of identity? This we
do not know.’To take one such case:Misguided ones belive the self consumes and lasts,Is uncreative,
and lacks features or pursuits.The differences between the schools of TīrthikasAre
based on minor variations on this theme. (6.121)As the Sāṃkhyas say:Primordial nature is
uncreated.The seven – the great principle, etc – are both created and creative.1The sixteen2
are just created.Soul is neither created nor creative.3The primordial nature (or primordial
creator; prakṛti)4 is so called because it has creative potential (prakaraṇa). In what
situation is it creative? When seeing the desire of a soul (puruṣa).5 When a soul gives
rise to desire to enjoy objects such as sound, being aware of the soul’s desire, nature
joins with the soul leading to the production of sound and so forth. The order in which this
takes place is in the following:From the primordial nature comes the great principle (mahat),6
from which comes the ego (ahaṃkara), and from this again the group of sixteen. Among
the sixteen, the five elements come from the five, meaning that sound and so forth give
rise to the elements.7That it is uncreated implies that it has creative potential, but is
not itself created in the way that the great principle is. The great principle and so forth
have creative potential as well as being created manifestations, which is why it is stated
that the seven – the great principle, etc – are both created and creative; the great principle
and the others are creators from the point of view of their own creations, and they
are created from the point of view of the primordial nature. The sixteen that consist of
the mind faculty and so forth are only creations, which is why it says that the sixteen
are created. The word just (tu) makes it clear that they are exclusively creations. When it
comes to souls, the phrase soul is neither created nor creative, is saying that it does
not have creative potential nor is a created manifestation.This being the order in which all
types of manifest creations happen, something should be said about how the soul becomes
a consumer as it gives rise to desire. This happens when, governed by the understanding mind
the mental faculties of the ear and so forth focus on the apprehended object, such as
sound, making the soul aware of the mentally grasped object. Since it is therefore in the
soul’s nature to entertain this mental awareness, it is said that ‘the self enjoys the objects.’
Desire hence leads to the passionate consumption of objects, but when passion is diminished
and the soul becomes free from the desire for objects, a gradual development of meditative
absorptions can take place leading to the adoption of divine sensory powers. With
that one comes to see the reality of things through divine sight, and on observing this
gives rise to a sense of shame, similar to that felt by an adulteress; and with no further
incitement towards the self there is then release. A step by step reversal of all the groups
of manifest creations leads to pleace without any further appearances, at which point
the soul is left in its solitary state, and this is what is called liberation.

It is permanent in the sense that, although temporarily crippled by manifest creations, it always
remains uncrippled in its original and isolated stated. While the primordial nature
is an active creator, and among the manifest creations some are also active creators, the
self is a non-creator in the sense of being a disinterested spectator to activities. The way
in which it is an enjoyer has already been explained above. It is without properties (guṇa)
since it is not of the nature of rajas, tamas and sattva.8 Since pervasiveness does not
involve activity, it is inactive. These are the characteristics of the soul (puruṣa).It
was mentioned that, ‘while the primordial nature is an active creator, and among the manifest
creations some are also active creators…;’ so which of the manifest creations are active
creators and which are not? We will go into some detail to explain this matter.Rajas,
tamas and sattva are the three properties. Rajas is characterised by movement and involvement,
tamas by heaviness and darkness, and sattva by lightness and clarity. They are synonymous
with happiness, suffering and confusion. In the primary principle (pradhāna) these are
in perfect equilibrium, their qualities in their original form cancelling each other out.
The primordial nature (prakṛti) is the state when these have not yet manifestly evolved.As
was said, ‘from the primordial nature comes the great principle (mahat),’ a synonym for
intelligence (buddhi). From the great principle comes the ego (ahaṃkara), which has three
forms: changeable (vikāra[?]), luminous (sāttvika) and dark (tāmasika). From the changeable
ego come the five subtle elements (tanmātra): form, sound, smell, taste and texture. From
the subtle elements come the major elements: earth, water, fire, wind and ether. From the
luminous ego come the five motor organs (voice, hands, legs, anus and genitals) and five
mental organs (eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin), which together with mind, which has both
characteristics, makes eleven. The dark ego is involved in both other types of ego. The
great principle, the ego and the five subtle elements are creators and creations, while
the ten faculties, mind and major elements are only creations. The primordial nature is uncreated.
This is what the scripture states.

The different systems of the misguided (tīrthika) are similar to that propounded by the Sāṃkhyas
with minor variations. The Vaiśeṣikas say that the self has nine principles: intelligence,
pleasure, pain, desire, anger, effort, righteousness (dharma), non-righteousness (adharma)
and creative force. Intelligence is what apprehends objects. Pleasure is the experience
of desired objects. Pain it its opposite. Attachment is to be drawn towards desirable
things. Aversion is to feel opposed to undesirable objects. Effort is to have the adroitness
to bring one’s goals to completion. Righteousness is what brings higher states and the
excellent goal. Non-righteousness is the opposite. Creative force is what thinking leads
to, and is the cause of thinking.As long as these nine principles of the self remain present
in the self, one will keep engaging in their related virtuous and non-virtuous activities,
thus perpetuating cyclic existence. When the soul, through discriminative insight, manages
to sever the principles of intelligence and so forth at the root, it will remain in its
own true state and become liberated.The self is also described as permanent, a creator,
a consumer, endowed with properties and, since it is pervasive, inactive. There are some
who hold that it is active due to the fact that it contracts and expands. The Vedavādins assert
for instance that it is like the space inhabiting jars: a difference in bodies makes
what is singular manifold.The differences between the systems of misguided schools are hence
based on minor variations in how the self is specified to be.

Concerning this self that is talked about in the various scriptural traditions of the misguided:Since
it is unborn, like a barren woman’s son,There cannot be a self like that of which
you speak,It cannot be the basis for the sense of self –As even relative that would not
be allowed. (6.122)This is because it would contradict their own inferential logic. Since
it is unborn, just like the son of a barren woman, a self such as they present it, cannot
exist. And, being unborn, it can also not be the reference for the ego (ahaṃkara). One should
see that, not only is it unreasonable for it to exist and be the reference for ego in
actual reality, but also relatively it doesn’t have these two traits.

And not only does it not make sense that it is something existent and supports the ego, alsoAnd
since its qualities that one may find describedWithin the various scriptures of the TīrthikasAre
contradicted when they argue it’s unborn,These features will amount to nothing
in the end. (6.123)According to the scriptures of the Sāṃkhyas, the self is characterised
as being permanent, a non-creator, a consumer, without features and inactive. But this self
can’t be permanent, can’t be a non-creator and so forth, and can’t be inactive because –
as they themselves say – it is unborn, just as the son of a barren woman. This will apply
equally against the tradition of the Vaiśeṣikas, using the same line of reasoning, ‘The self
can’t be permanent, can’t be a non-creator…,’ and so forth. This position can in fact
be used against any proponent of self, using the argument of it being unborn and the example
of the barren woman’s son to expose the thing itself and its features.

This being the case,There is therefore no self distinct from aggregates,There is therefore no
self that exists as something separate from the aggregates, since apart from the them no
self can be perceived. If it did exist as something separate from the aggregates, it would
be something that could be established on its own, but this is not the case. Hence, no self
exists that is distinct from the aggregates,Since it can’t be perceived without the aggregates.As
stated:It is not possible for there to be a selfThat is different from the assimilated.If
separate it should be perceived also withoutThe assimilated, yet it is not.9Likewise,If
it was different from the aggregates,It would not have the aggregates’ characteristics.10Not
only is a self that is different from the aggregates non-existent; alsoSince
they know no such thing and still think there’s a self,The worldly wouldn’t claim the ego
is thus based. (6.124)Even those who do not identify the self in these particular ways will
still due to their habitual clinging have notions of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ and thus believe in
a self. It is therefore not viable that there is a self distinct from the aggregates that
forms the support for the ego.They may then think, ‘Even though they do not at present think
of it in terms of being permanent, unproduced and so forth, from past familiarity they
still have the view that it is the ego’s reference point.’That is not so. It is not the case
that only those who have a familiarity with the scriptures of these individuals believe
in a self.

One may observe that there are those without such prior familiarity, who still maintain a sense
of ego in this life have, such as:Through aeons born among for instance animals,They would
not think it unproduced and permanent.Yet still they would be harbouring a sense of self.There
is therefore no self distinct from aggregates. (6.125)Beings that have not left
the animal states for an untold number of aeons, will not during that time have considered
there to be a self that has these features. The words for instance (api) are meant to include
hell beings and so forth. Having observed that those who haven’t been exposed to a self
that that havs these features, still have a sense of ego, what rational individual would
then insist that such a self, forming the basis for a sense of ego, exists? There cannot
therefore be a self that is distinct from the aggregates.

There are some belonging to our own side who say:Some say no self is found distinct from aggregates,The
reference for self-view is thus the aggregates.The reasonings presented have shown
that no self can be found separate from the aggregates. There is therefore no self that
is distinct from the aggregates, and the aggregates are hence the only reference for the
view of identity. This is why it is said that the self is merely the aggregates alone. This
is the position held by the noble Saṃmitīya school11 , who belong to our own tradition.Among
them,While some insist all five support the view of self,Some others will insist it
is the mind alone. (6.126)For some it is the five aggregates (form, feeling, perception,
formations and consciousness) which serve as the reference for the view of identity, and maintain
that it is in connection with them that this conception of selfhood occurs. As is
stated:The Illustrious One said: O mendicants, those ascetics and brahmins who perceive things
in terms of ‘I’, are in fact only perceiving the five assimilated aggregates.12They therefore
say that it was in order to clarify the statement, ‘The view you have is in relation
to a collection (kāya) that is by nature perishing (√sad-), and not in relation to an
I or a mine,’13 that he expressed the view (dṛṣṭi) that insists on I and mine as being the
view of identity (satkāyadṛṣṭi).14Others claim that the self is in the mind, and refer to
verses such as the following, where the mind is spoken of as the self:Oneself is one’s own
protector.Who else can protect one?The wise attain the higher realmsBy properly taming the
self.15How do they support this? By saying that there is no self apart from the aggregates,
and that other sutra statements talk of taming the mind:To tame the mind is excellent.Taming
the mind brings happiness.16The mind being the basis of the ego, is thus labeled the
self.

To reply to this:The aggregates are multiple, so if they areThe self, the consequence would
be a lot of selves.The self is then a substance, and can be observed,And what you can engage
is not a fallacy. (6.127)To hold the position that the aggregates are the self will mean
that the self is manifold because the aggregates are manifold. And if it was the case that
mind is the self, one could distinguish between eye-consciousness and so forth, or between
the different moments of consciousness appearing and disappearing, and the self would
also then be multiple. Fault like this must be mentioned if one is to follow reason. What
the faults will be, is in this way explained to those who profess the self to be the aggregates
or the consciousness, and other faults that befall them are mentioned in relation to
each of these positions. A scriptural source states that, ‘With birth in the world, only
a single individual is born,’17 which means that the self is not held to be multiple.Concerning
the statement the self would be substantial, since the concept of aggregate is used
in relation to substances of form and so forth distinguished in terms of the past and so forth,
and it is only in relation to these that the convention self is used, the self too would
be a substance. And that is not the intent of the following statements:Mendicants, these
five are mere names, mere conventions, mere designations. Which five? The past, the future,
space, transcendence and the individual.18And:As with a gathering of partsOne may speak
of a chariot,Contingent on the aggregatesConvention grants a sentient being.19Since it
follows that the self would be substantial, the aggregates cannot therefore be the self.Also,
since the view of identity would be based in something substantial, not being mistaken
it would be equal to conceptions such as blue or yellow. To give up the view of identity
would not then an abandonment of the origin, but would simply be like letting go of an attraction
towards an object, such as visual impressions of blue, yellow and so forth.

Also,Nirvana would be the destruction of the self.Before, it would arise and vanish all the
time.Without an agent the result would not exist.Distinct are culprit and experiencing side.
(6.128)If the self were made up of the aggregates, when one reaches nirvana and the aggregates
are discontinued, the self would be annihilated. Such a belief in annihilation would
be a nihilistic view, since according to yourself it constitutes an extremist view to think
that there is permanence or annihilation in relation to any idea of selfhood involved
in the ‘I’- and ‘mine’-based view of self. One cannot therefore accept that the self is discontinued
at the time of nirvana, since that would constitute an extremist view. Hence,
the self cannot be made up of the aggregates.Just as prior to entering nirvana, the aggregates
arise and vanish every instant, the self too would be arising and vanishing, since the
self is made up of the aggregates. And just as one couldn’t then say, ‘This body of mine
came into being,’ the statement, ‘At that point, at that time, I was a king named Māndātṛ,’
would not have been made, because the self, just like the body, would have been destroyed,
and it would be accepted that it was another that was born at present. As the Treatise
states:The assimilated, which arisesAnd ceases to be, is not the self.How indeed could the
assimilatedBecome the that which assimilates.20Likewise,If the self were the aggregates,It
would be appearing and disappearing.21And if it keeps appearing and disappearing, an agent
self does not exist, which means it cannot have a relationship to a result. If the act
by which it comes into being is impermanent, the agent then no longer existing, having nothing
to support it the act as well will not exist. There will then be no viable relationship
between actions and their results.If the result of karma produced in a prior moment were
experienced in subsequent moments, the result of karma accumulated by one would be experienced
by another, which is why it says, the culprit and the experiencer would be other.
What has been done can then disappear, and there can be consequences from what one has not
done. The Treatise states:If it were different, even in the absenceOf that it could then
still be present.And what was would likewise then remain,It could now be born without having
died.Karmas would disappear, be annihilated,And the consequence of acts carried out by
oneCould be experienced by another.These and other faults would follow.22It does not therefore
make sense that the aggregates can be the self.

They might then say: ‘Although the former and latter moments are indeed different, they form
a single continuum and we are therefore not at fault.’To reply:‘It’s really one continuum,
thus we’re not at fault;’The problems with continua were shown before.This was treated when
it was said, things related respectively to Maitreya and Upagupta…23 And as stated:If
being a human is different from a god,That would mean impermanence.If being a human is different
from a god,A continuity becomes untenable.24Thus, since it does not make sense that
things that are mutually distinct can be included within a single continuum, this consequence
cannot be avoided.To express that neither the aggregates nor the mind can therefore be
the self, it was said:The aggregates or mind as self thus makes not sense,The foregoing
discussion of unwanted consequences is not the only thing that shows how untenable it is for
the aggregates or the mind to be the self. In addition:The world as finite and so forth
was not endorsed. (6.129)Since it was not mentioned whether there is an end to the world
and so forth, it does not make sense to say that the aggregates or the mind is the self. The
fourteen indeterminable issues are mentioned by all schools:‘The world is eternal’ or ‘the
world is not eternal;’ or ‘the world is both eternal and not eternal’ or ‘the world is
neither eternal nor not eternal…;’25Since the Illustrious One said that no reply could be
given to these, they are classified as indeterminable issues (avyākṛtamūla).These were hence
dismissed, and if a mendicant upholds the idea that the world is eternal, the scriptures
of the Pūrvaśaila school state that, ‘The one who upholds the view that the world is eternal
is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is not eternal
is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is both eternal and not
eternal is subject to expulsion. The one who upholds the view that the world is neither
eternal nor not eternal is subject to expulsion;’ and that one should not associate with
them.26There are thus said to be fourteen indeterminable issues. And if you take the word
world to mean the aggregates, since the aggregates arise and cease and are therefore impermanent,
one would in effect determine that the world is not eternal. And by saying that the
aggregates are not present subsequent to nirvana, one is determining that the world is finite.
One would similarly have determined that the Tathāgata does not exist after death.
But since the statements saying that the world is finite and so forth were dismissed, it is
thus unreasonable that the aggregates themselves can be the self.

Also,For you, when yogis understand the lack of self,All things would then lose their existence
certainly.If the aggregates or the mind were the self, when the yogi ponders the truth
and understands the truth of suffering in terms of non-self – that ‘all phenomena are selfless’
– then it would be seeing the lack of aggregates that would be seeing the lack of self,
which is not what you assert. The aggregates cannot therefore be the self.One might contend,
‘When the term self is used in the context of the relationship between the act and
its result, it can only be referring to the aggregates as there is nothing else that can
be the self. But when seeing the lack of self, it is the soul (puruṣa), the inner experiencer
(antaḥkaraṇa) imagined by non-buddhists, that is being referred to. Thus, when seeing
selflessness one is just seeing the idea of a lack of this inner soul, and it does not follow
that one is seeing the lack of all things.’To reply:If it is an eternal self that is dismissed,Then
neither mind nor aggregates can be the self. (6.130)If you worry that the consequence
will be that there are then no existent things, and so seize on the idea that the
term self refers to a permanent self, no longer thinking that it is the aggregates or the
mind that are the self, then you have deserted your own position.One might then think, ‘I
do not agree that that is what it is referring in that context, and therefore I am not at
fault.’Well, this too will not suffice. How can you just be adopting whatever unreasonable
position that you like, saying that in that particular case it is the inner soul that is
the self, and otherwise it is the aggregates? If you say it is because it just can’t be,
it has also already been shown that it is impossible that it can be referring to the aggregates.
Hence, if you do not accept that in the context of the thought, ‘all phenomena are
selfless,’ the term self refers to the aggregates, you cannot claim that it does so elsewhere.
If you claim that it does refer to the aggregates elsewhere, then you will have to say
it does in this context too.

