Having thus also refuted production from other, now in relation to the refutation of production
from both, it was said:That things arise from both will not be reasonable,Because one
will encounter faults explained above.For the Possibilists (syādvādika), production takes
place both from self and other, meaning that they believe in production from both. A pot,
they say, comes about through factors such as a lump of clay, a stick, a potter’s wheel, string,
water, the potter and so forth. Since the clay and the pot aren’t separate things,
the pot produced exists in the nature of the clay, hence self-production. Since such things
as the work of the potter involved in its production are distinct from it, there is other-production.
This is the idea underlying their belief in both self- and other-production.And
just as with the external environment, individual creatures also come about from self
and other. In this regard they present a list of principles: ‘There are nine principles involved
in this: life-force, inanimate factors, merit, negativity, defilements, vows and so
forth.’ Given that Maitreya’s future birth exists in the nature of his life-force, there
is self-production, because Maitreya and his life-force are not separate things. Life-force
is a component of migratory existence, and these opponents therefore assert that it is a
cause for existences such as that of a god. Since one’s birth takes place through external
factors such as one’s father and mother, religious ways or lack thereof, defilements and
so forth, there is other-production. ‘Hence,’ they say, ‘we are not affected by the statement,
“There is no production from self, nor is there production from other,” because we propose
that there is neither exclusively self-production nor other-production.’This is not
a reasonable argument, as explained: Production from both is likewise unjustified. Why? Since
it would involve the faults already mentioned. Because holding the position of both involves
the faults already pointed out for both positions, production from both is not possible.Because
the pot exists in the nature of the clay there is no production, since it already
exists. As has been explained:If it came from itself there would be nothing gained.What
is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense.1Similarly, it should be acknowledged
that as he already exists by nature of his life-force, Maitreya isn’t then born.Because
the pot is not present in the identity of the water, string, wheel and so forth, it cannot
be produced from them. As has been explained:If it were possible that something else
could be producedBased on what’s other, utter darkness should emerge from flames;And one would
see production of all things from everything,Since in their difference every non-producer
is the same.2The case of Maitreya arising from what is other, such as his father and
mother, may be explained in the same manner.Just as it was previously shown how production
from self and from other is untenable in the worldly relative and ultimately, to now conclude
the above treatment that showed that the reasoning presented by the Syādvādikas does
not work it was said:Not in the world nor actually can this be claimed ...To express that,
we do not merely allude to the reasons presented above that show how production from both
is untenable, but will explain so here as well, it was said:When by each one production cannot
be sustained. (6.98)For example, since a single sesame seed may yield oil, many of them
will as well, while this is not the case for sand where such a capacity is not observed.
Likewise, it is when productive ability is there for individual members that a collection
of such things will have it too. Hence, production from both is unreasonable.

