Also,For you the yogi seeing selflessness would notThen realise the reality of form and such.Not
having seen its nature, when perceiving formThey’re caught by it, creating passion and
so forth. (6.131)Someone who has not savoured the nectar found in the centre of the flower
cannot gain an experience of it merely by saying that there is a cuckoo upon the flower.
And once its flavour is known, the experience will not go away, and one cannot rid oneself
of the accompanying clinging, just by saying there’s no cuckoo upon flower.It’s the same
in this case. If a yogi sees that phenomena like forms and so forth lack a permanent self
but does not come to understand their nature, what will he have gained? And, although by
perceiving the nature of forms and so forth the attachment to such perceptions are relinquished,
what effect will that have on the non-existent self? Nobody who understands its lack
of existence and abandons attachment to these objects is doing this so that it may experience
pleasure, thinking, ‘May the inner soul be happy!’; or, worrying that it will suffer,
avoids those things that are uncomfortable to it. Since perception of form leads to this
involvement, attachment and so forth will be the outcome. And since coming to understand
its nature will not lead to the destruction of attachment and so forth, this approach may
be considered equal to that of non-Buddhist schools.

One might think, ‘We accept the validity of the scriptures, and will not be harmed by these
logical measures. And the scriptures do state that the aggregates constitute the self:O mendicants,
those ascetics and brahmins who perceive things in terms of ‘I’, are in fact only
perceiving the five assimilated aggregates.1‘And so, this is the case here too.’That aggregates
are self, you base this claim uponThe Teacher’s statement that, ‘The aggregates are
self.’But this refutes a self distinct from aggregates,As other sutras state that form is
not the self. (6.132)This sutra where it is recognised that, ‘The aggregates are the self,’
is not in fact saying that the aggregates constitute the self. What does it then say?
The intent of the Illustrious One was to indicate that there is no self whatsoever separate
from the aggregates, in order to refute the scriptures of the misguided using the relative
truth, and to clarify what is the unmistaken relative truth. If you ask how one can be
certain that this is a refutation of a self that is distinct from the aggregates, the reason
is that other sutras refute the idea that form and so forth constitute the self.

‘How so?’That neither form nor feeling constitute the self,Nor do perception, formations, or
consciousness,Has been proclaimed in various other sutra quotes.In brief, that aggregates
are self is not affirmed. (6.133)It is therefore certain that when this sutra states, ‘[when
they] regard these five assimilated aggregates as the self…,’2 it is in fact refuting
that there is a self that is something other than the aggregates. While instances when form
and so forth constituting a self is refuted, should be taken to express a refutation of
the self that is the object of the view of identity, as dependently imputed in relation to
the assimilated aggregates, since these are contexts where one is considering the actual
reality of things. And it makes sense that one will be freed from attachment to form and so
forth since, ‘When the assimilator is not observed, what it assimilates will likewise not
be present.’ As this is what is stated in other sutras, the previous sutra quote is not
therefore claiming that the aggregates are the self.

Also, although this sutra statement is phrased as an affirmation, it wouldn’t serve to indicate
that the aggregates constitute the self. And why? As,When saying it’s the aggregates that
are the self,It’s their collection, not the aggregates themselves.For example, when saying
that the trees make up the forest, it is the collection of trees that are a forest. It
is not the trees themselves, since it would then follow that the forest is present in each
individual tree. Likewise, it is the collection of the aggregates that make up the self.And
since a collection isn’t actually anything whatsoever:But this does not exist, and so
it cannot be –Can’t be protector, cannot tame, nor serve as judge. (6.134)The Illustrious
One spoke of a protector and a judge in the statement:Oneself is one’s own protector.Oneself
is one’s own enemy.Oneself is one’s own judgeOf one’s good and bad deeds.3And of a tamer
in the statement:The wise attain the higher realmsBy properly taming their self.4A collection
however, not being something substantially existent, cannot logically be a protector,
a tamer, or a judge, and the collection is therefore not the self.

One may think, ‘Because the collection is not anything apart from the collected parts, one identifies
the result as the collection of parts. It is hence permissible to speak of a protector,
a tamer and a judge.’This cannot be, since the problems with that have already been
explained. And also,A chariot would be the presence of its parts.As with a chariot, the
same goes for the self.From a sutra:‘A self’, you say, O demon mind;A fancy you thus entertain.It’s
void this heap, of factors formed.There is no being present here.As with a gathering
of partsOne may speak of a chariot,Contingent on the aggregatesConvention grants a sentient
being.5Thus,‘Contingent on the aggregates,’ the sutra states.The self is thus not just
the aggregates combined. (6.135)Something that is contingently imputed cannot be reduced
to the assembly of its perceived parts, because a dependent labelling is taking place,
just as when elements combine to form a product. Although things may be produced from the
elements and receive labels such as blue and so forth, or eye and so forth, these two types
of phenomena are not just the mere assembly of the elements. Similarly, although the self
has the characteristic of being an imputation made in relation to the aggregates, that it
is just the assembly of the aggregates does not suffice.One might object, ‘That is inconclusive
owing to things such as pots.’No it isn’t, since one cannot prove that such things
as pots are reducible to the gathering of form and so forth, and because of similar criticisms.6

One could ask, ‘If the mere collection of wheels and so forth is not the chariot, then what
is?’ And it might then be supposed that only when the wheels and so forth assume a certain
shape does the term chariot become applicable. And likewise, that the self is just the arrangement
of form and so forth.But that is not so. And why?‘It is the shape,’ you say, but
shape belongs to form.So though you say it’s these that constitute the self,The mental groups
cannot then be what this self isAnd why is that?Due to the fact that these cannot assume
a shape. (6.136)Meaning that this is so because they have no physical form.

Furthermore,It makes no sense that grasped and grasper are the same,Why?Since act and actor
then would be identical.The grasper means the one who assimilates by performing the grasping,
while the act is the assimilation that takes place when something is grasped. And here,
the grasper is a reference to the self, while the grasped refers to the five aggregates.
If the self is the mere collection of form and so forth, then the grasper and the act are
identical. But this would not be acceptable, since it would then follow that the elements
and the material components they make up, and the pot and the potter, are identical. As stated:If
fuel were the fire,Act and actor are identical.7And,The fire and the fuel thus fully
clarifyAll such relationships,The self and what is assimilated, along with thingsLike
earthen pots, woollen cloths and such.8Here it is saying that, just as fire and fuel cannot
be claimed to be identical, this claim does not hold for the self and the assimilated either.One
might think, ‘There is no existent assimilator doing the acting, there is nothing
more than the mere collection of the assimilated.’But to explain how this is unreasonable:‘There
is no actor, just the act,’ you might then think.But no, since without actor there
can be no act. (6.137)Thus it can’t be like that: if one does not accept an actor, the act
which is then unfounded cannot be accepted. As the Treatise states:And assimilation should
thus be understood,As act and agent is then excluded.Through the case of agent and actionAll
remaining things can be made clear.9Here, the verb root has been combined with the lyuṭ-suffix10
, making upādāna, with reference to the act of assimilation. But since a verb
root cannot occur isolated from its function, the way it functions implies that which is
assimilated and the assimilator; since in the word in question, assimilation (upādāna), the
verb has been supplied with a lyuṭ-suffix, by the rule which states, ‘kṛt and lyuṭ are inclusive,’11
it is also expressive of that which is assimilated.Thus, just as it is in relation
to an actor that the acted is designated, and in relation to the acted that an actor
is designated, the assimilator is similarly designated in relation to the assimilated, and
the assimilated in relation to the assimilator. It states:So it is neither distinct from
the assimilated,Nor the same as the assimilated.There is no self without the assimilated,Still
one can’t conclude that it does not exist.12This is saying that there cannot be an act
in the absence of an actor. And when it is stated that, ‘Though the actor is not apprehended,
the act still exists, as does its result,’13 this is meant to refute an inherently
existent actor. It is not to be understood as saying that conventional norms of what is dependently
designated should be discarded. As stated:A person affected by ignorance generates
meritorious formations…14

Also,The Sage states that the self is recognisedWith reference to earth, water, fire, wind,To
consciousness and space – six elements –And six supports of contact, such as eyes; (6.138)

And is assumed from mind and mental states.And it is therefore these though not the same,Nor
just the mere collection they make up.One cannot find the sense of self in these. (6.139)From
the sutras:O Great King. The person, the individual, is the six elements, the six fields
of contact and the eighteen movements of the mind.15The six elements are earth, water,
fire, wind, consciousness and space, and it is in relation to these that the self is imputed.
The six supports of contact, such as eyes, refer to the sense field of visual perception
and so forth, up to the sense field of mental perception, and it is in relation to these
that the self is imputed.The eighteen movements of the mind refers to the six ways the
mind can be pleasantly involved with visual, audible, olfactory, palatable, tactile, or mental
objects, the ways it can be unpleasantly involved with these, and the ways it can have
a neutral involvement with these; and in relation to these, and assumed from the mind and
mental states, the self is imputed.Since it is stated that, ‘the self is imputed in relation
to the elements and so forth,’ it here states, it is these though not the same, meaning
that it is not anything other nor is it the same. It neither makes sense that is it just
the mere collection of these. Since it cannot be that the self is these aforementioned phenomena,
it does not stand to reason that the ego mind is found in them. And when the aggregates
cannot be the abode of the ego, and is not something other than the aggregates, the
ego then has no abode; and the yogi seeing no ‘I’ comes to understand that neither does
‘mine’ have any essence, eliminates every conditioned phenomenon and transcends to the state
free from adoption, illustrating how brilliant this analysis is.

If those saying the aggregates, or the mind, are the abodes of the self were right, a sense
of self would remain as long the aggregates were present, since they constitute the actual
basis for the sense of self. To explain:That seeing selflessness would shed the lasting selfWhile
not believing it to be ego’s support,I find it quite astounding then to hear you
sayThat knowing selflessness uproots the view of self. (6.140)If the ego is based in a permanent
self, and without it the ego is shed, yet you claim the abode of the self to be something
other than that, and that only through seeing that something else is lacking that the
sense of ego is halted – my goodness! How extraordinary!

