That is not the case. Why?Were eye-mentation separate from what’s making it,Like co-occurring
eyes, perceptions and so forth,What purpose would production serve for what exists?The problems
faced if it does not have been explained. (6.20)If you claim that eyes and so forth,
and the simultaneous perceptions and so forth, are the very conditions for such an eye
consciousness, then being existent at that time it would be an ‘other’ relying on them, but
for something existent to be produced serves no purpose at all, hence it would not be produced.
Then, if wishing to avoid its non-production, you do not accept that it is existing,
saying, ‘At the time in question there is no otherness of the eye and so forth in relation
to the non-existent consciousness,’ the faults of such a position have already been explained.
Therefore, if you claim such other-production, even if otherness was a possibility,
production would be impossible, and since that is impossible both are impossible. Even
if production was possible, otherness would be impossible, and since that is impossible both
are impossible. Hence, external objects do not exist in any way whatsoever, and with the
emptiness of external objects one is left with nothing but mere words, which shows that
this way of understanding it is unacceptable.

Now, to explain how from among cause and effect there is no time when there is reliance on a
cause, it was said:If separate things are made by a productive cause,Do they exist or not?
Both? Neither of these two?Why need producing if they do? What’s done if not?What’s done
if both? What’s done if neither of the two? (6.21)A producing cause is not the producer of
an existent product, because of the faults that have already been explained in such statements
as, ‘That the produced is produced once more is senseless;’ there would not then be
the slightest purpose to it having conditions. When the produced does not exist, what would
the producers do? It is just as non-existent as the horns of a donkey. As stated:For you
who assert the existence of results,And you who assert their non-existence,1There would
be no point in embellishingYour house with pillars and such.2And from the Middle Way Treatise:If
a result has an intrinsic essence,How can a cause produce it?If a result does not have
an intrinsic essence,How can a cause produce it?If there is no production,Causation becomes
unfeasible.If causation is unfeasible,What becomes of the result?3

For that which is both, what would conditions do for it? The faults that follow from this are
those that have already been explained. A dual entity is both, and when it is both it is
in fact two. But since having an essence of existence and non-existent in one thing at the
same time is impossible, something having that sort of nature cannot occur. And since it
cannot occur, what could producing conditions do for it? As the Treatise states:How can nirvāṇa
be bothAn existent and a non-existent?These two cannot coexist,Just like light and
darkness.4Likewise,What both is and is not an agentCannot make what both is and is not.Since
they are mutually exclusive,How could one thing both be and not be?5

If a result could be neither existent nor non-existent, what would be the function of conditions
in relation to something which is neither, since a result that defies both existence
and non-existence cannot exist? When both existence and non-existence are impossible, to refute
them by saying neither existent nor non-existent doesn’t make the slightest difference.
When neither are established, to have what is neither existent nor non-existent is impossible.
As stated:Nirvāṇa is taught to be neitherAn existent nor a non-existent.If non-existents
and existents were established,This would be established.6

If they say, ’Since any sort of reasoning we put forth in order to establish production is completely
incinerated by the fire of your intellect, like firewood soaked in oil, we will
no longer encourage the blazing fire of your intelligence with any more logical fuel. You
may ask, “Will not your theory fail without backing it up with logical reasoning?” It will
not. This is something established from the point of view of the world, hence there is no
use at all for reasoning, since worldly perception is very powerful.’‘What is the point of
all these reasoned argumentsWhen it’s the normal view the world gives credence to.The world
indeed agrees things come from other things,Which means other-production – what is there
to prove?’ (6.22)‘When all worldly people maintain a certain view, that is something very
influential, and it is certainly other-production that is this view. When reasoning finds
faults with something, it is only relevant when it comes to what is not directly perceived,
and not what is within the scope of direct perception. Therefore, even though it is not
reasonable, things are still produced from other.’

