A quote from the scriptures will serve to illustrate the genuine state of all dharmas. The noble
Ten Grounds states:O victor heirs. The bodhisattvas who have fully completed the path
on the fifth bodhisattva ground, enter the sixth bodhisattva ground engaging with the ten
equalities of dharmas. Which ten? They are all dharmas’ equality as featureless; all dharmas’
equality as without characteristics; and in the same way their equality in being without
arising, unproduced, detached, pure from the outset, unelaborate, without adoption and
without rejection; all dharmas’ equality in being like illusions, dreams, optical distortions,
echoes, a moon in the water, reflections and apparitions; and all dharmas’ equality
in the non-duality of things and non-things. When they realise the nature of all dharmas to
be in this way, through their acumen and resultant tolerance they attain the sixth bodhisattva
ground, Presence.1

Thus, here only the reasoning of the equality of dharmas in being without production2 is explained.
The intention being that, by virtue of that, the other types of equality will be easily
understood. As master Nāgārjuna sets forth in the beginning of the Middle Way Treatise:Not
from self, not from other,Not from both, nor without a causeAre entities ever producedAt
any point as anything.3Ever (jātu) means at any time. The term at any point (kecana)
is a locative relative pronoun (‘support’-word) and synonym for somewhere (kvacid), and can
indicate location, time, or tenet-system. The word anything is a relative pronoun (‘supported’-word)
expressing outer or inner entities. Thus, one could here elaborate the sentence
and say, ‘Outer and inner entities are not produced from self with respect to any place,
time or tenet-system.’ Here, when it says not (na), this relates to production from self
as an argument for existence, and not to being existent, since the refutation of that is
implicit. This should likewise be applied to the other three assertions.Having thus reiterated
this fourfold thesis, in order to prove it through reasoning, it was stated:It can’t
come from itself, and how from other things?Can’t come from both, how could it be without
a cause?The sense of the statement, ‘Not produced from self …’ is as is stated here: ‘It
can’t come from self ….’ The remaining statements should be similarly linked.

