To conclude the chapter on intelligence by expressing the excellent and extraordinary qualities
of the bodhisattvas with a readiness for the perfection of intelligence, it was said:Thus
brightened by the rays of clear intelligenceThey see the triple world as unborn from the
startAs clear as a myrobalan plum in their palm –Cessation is achieved through truth that’s
relative. (6.224)The word thus refers to the analyses that have been presented. The light
of the intelligence developed through the aforementioned analyses sheds a light that
overcomes the darkness which blocks the seeing of the reality of things, and the bodhisattvas
are here described as now having that. Through the power of the relative truth, they now
rest in the state of cessation.

To express how one does not abandon beings as the wish to protect them is at the core of cessation,
it was said:Although remaining in cessation all the time,Compassion for defenceless
ones will still occur.Since their activities are within the realm of samsara, while their
excellent mind is within the realm of nirvana, their compassion for defenceless beings grows
exponentially.From this point onwards their intelligence defeatsHalf-buddhas and those
born from the Sugata’s speech. (6.225)They are mentioned together with the intermediate
buddhas, thus it says along with the half-buddhas.1 And who are they? Those who are born from
the Sugata’s speech, which means the hearers (śrāvaka). These are all defeated by the
intelligence of the bodhisattvas who have reached the grounds beyond the sixth, the seventh
and so forth.

They soar ahead of beings, like the king of swans,On white and outstretched wings of truth,
the relativeAnd ultimate, and speed ahead on virtue’s windAcross the ocean of the Victor’s
qualities. (6.226)Their relative qualities will also increase immensely. The two truths are
their outstretched wings by which they traverse the great ocean of the Victor’s qualities
in the company of the swans among beings who are developing what is excellent. The explanation
of the sixth resolve has thus been completed.

This was the sixth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Seventh Ground: Far Progressed

Now, in terms of the seventh resolve it was said:On Far Progressed the bodhisattvas can engageCessation
in each moment, and they now attainA brilliant perfection in their skilful means.
(7.1)To engage cessation refers to entering into the state of the final goal, meaning
cessation into ultimate reality where all mental elaboration ceases. The bodhisattvas on the
seventh ground, Far Progressed, now enter into the cessation they achieved on the sixth
ground in each moment. As stated:O heirs of the Victor, from the sixth bodhisattva ground
onwards they settle within the state of cessation of bodhisattvas. In each moment of mind
the bodhisattvas established on this seventh bodhisattva ground enter into and emerge from
the state of cessation, but this cannot be described as the definitive experience of cessation.2Their
perfection of skilful means is also utterly purified.It should be taken into
consideration that skilful means, aspiration, power and wisdom are in fact particular aspects
of intelligence (prajñā) itself, and that in the context of the perfection of intelligence
it is solely the intelligence of analytical investigation that is dealt with, and not
the others.

This was the seventh resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Eight Ground: Immovable

In terms of the eight resolve it was said:To reach yet even greater virtue than beforeThese
mighty beings enter the ImmovableWhere they acquire irreversibility.The bodhisattvas now enter
Immovable, the eight bodhisattva ground where they become irreversible in order to achieve
even greater virtue than previously. Concerning the attainment of even greater virtue
than before, it is stated:O sons of the Victor, it is just like an ocean-going ship. It
needs to be dragged with much toil before it reaches the water, but as soon as it’s afloat
it is propelled by the strength of the wind and no more effort is needed. The distance it
can run across the ocean in a single day is infinitely longer than could be achieved in even
a hundred years of dragging it across land. Likewise, O sons of the Victor, when bodhisattvas
have gathered a great many roots of virtue in their practice of the Greater Vehicle,
and then reach the ocean of bodhisattva activity, a single moment of spontaneous wisdom
will take them infinitely closer to the wisdom of omniscience than all their previous effort
could accomplish in a hundred thousand aeons.3Their aspirations being fully pure, they
areNow roused from their cessation by victorious ones. (8.1)The ten innumerable hundred thousand
aspirations they made in the context of the first resolve, such as those expressed
in the Ten Great Aspirations, now become completely purified, greatly increasing the present
perfection of aspiration. But while the bodhisattvas on Immovable are defined as being
on the ground of the heirs, they become regents on the ninth, and are crowned as wheel-turning
monarchs on the tenth. So as the bodhisattvas on the Immovable ground have entered into
cessation, the illustrious buddhas will then rouse them from this cessation.

As stated:O heirs of the Victor. As the bodhisattvas on the Immovable bodhisattva ground are
empowered by their past aspirations and have settled within the entrance to Dharma, the illustrious
buddhas influence them with their tathāgata wisdom, and speak the following: ‘Excellent,
O son of good family, excellent! You have now reached acceptance of the ultimate
in accordance with the Buddha’s teachings. However, O son of good family, you still do not
possess the ten powers, four confidences and so forth as I do, and must apply yourself in
order to gain these perfect qualities of buddhahood. You must be diligent! But do not abandon
this door of acceptance! O son of good family, although you are now resting within the
liberation of peace, you must consider the ordinary immature beings who are not at peace,
who being ravaged by many afflictions and beleaguered by swarms of conceptual thoughts,
are not at all at peace. O son of good family, remember the aspirations you made in the past!
…’… If the illustrious buddhas did not4 thus influence the bodhisattvas with their omniscient
wisdom, they would pass into complete nirvana … [and so forth].5

Because they have now been roused from cessation,No blemish will maintain its hold upon the
non-desirous mind,And so, upon the eight ground stains are severed, utter peace attained.Afflictions
at an end, they now surpass the triple realm, and stillThe space-like boundless
wealth of all the buddhas lies beyond their reach. (8.2)As the sun of non-conceptual wisdom
rises, the gloom of the afflictions that has caused birth in the three realms is completely
eradicated, and true peace ensues. But, even though they have abandoned this and are
now supreme among the three levels of the world, at this stage the bodhisattvas are still
not yet able to achieve the boon of the illustrious buddhas. To gain that they must exert
themselves further. As it says, ‘they would pass into complete nirvana …,’6 since they can
now be free from the attachment of the three realms. Without being free from attachment,
nirvana is not possible.

It might be asked, ‘If they are now freed from the attachment of the three realms, how are they
then able to perfect all the qualities of buddhahood when samsara has ceased?’To explain:Although
samsara has been stopped, they have attained the powers ten,And through these,
manifest in various ways to beings of the world. (8.3)Although samsara has ceased at this
point, the ten powers are now born in them, and by means of these they can manifest their
mental body in a variety of different forms. It is therefore not contradictory that they
can continue to completely fulfil their accumulations.As for the ten powers, they are as stated:(1)
They have mastery of life in terms of blessing their lifespan to last for inexpressible
upon inexpressible aeons. (2) They have mastery of mind in terms of immersing themselves
in the wisdom of immeasurable meditative concentrations. (3) They have mastery of material
implements in terms of displaying the blessing of adorning all the realms of the world
with many adornments. (4) They have mastery of karma in terms of revealing the impact
of an action’s result at its particular time. (5) They have mastery of birth in terms of
the ability to display birth within any world. (6) They have mastery of prayer as they can
display true and complete buddhahood in any buddha field at any time desired. (7) They have
mastery of aspirations as they can display within any world system vast arrays of buddhas.
(8) They have mastery of miraculous abilities as they can display magical emanations in
all buddha fields. (9) They have mastery of wisdom as they can display a Tathāgata’s powers,
confidences, unique buddha qualities, perfect marks and signs, as well as true and complete
awakening. (10) They have mastery of Dharma as they can teach the dharma in any form
that is without centre or limit.7The explanation of the eight resolve has thus been completed.

This was the eight resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Ninth Ground: Perfect Intellect

In terms of the ninth resolve it was said:Upon the ninth their power is complete and pure in
every way,And likewise fully pure their qualities of perfect intellect. (9.1)On the ninth
bodhisattva ground the bodhisattvas’ perfection of power is fully purified, and they achieve
the four pure qualities of perfect intellect: a detailed knowledge of things, meaning,
interpretation and eloquence. (1) The detailed knowledge of things is to understand the defining
characteristics of all phenomena. (2) The detailed knowledge of meaning is to understand
the classifications of all phenomena. (3) The detailed knowledge of interpretation
is to understand how to express things clearly. (4) The detailed knowledge of eloquence is
to have an uninterrupted understanding of the relevant causes of phenomena.The explanation
of the ninth resolve has thus been completed.

This was the ninth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Tenth Ground: Cloud of Dharma

In terms of the tenth resolve it was said:Upon them on the tenth ground every buddha now bestows
supremeEmpowerment, and through their wisdom they now reach supremacy.Then from these
victor’s heirs spontaneous rains of Dharma shower down,Like torrents from the clouds, so
beings’ crops of virtue may increase. (10.1)The bodhisattvas on the tenth bodhisattva ground
are empowered by the illustrious buddhas, as stated:When ten incalculable meditative concentrations
come to an end, a concentration called Empowered to be indistinguishable from
the wisdom of omniscience develops for the bodhisattva. As soon as this happens, a giant
jewel lotus the size of a million trichiliocosms inlaid with all kinds of precious jewels
…, and surrounded by as many lotuses as there are minute particles in ten incalculable trichiliocosms.
The bodhisattva then comes to rest, seated there in a body that corresponds.
As soon as he attains this concentration and appears seated there …. From the circle of hair
between the brows of all the illustrious buddhas who have gathered from all the buddha
fields, light now streams forth to empower the bodhisattva.8Their perfection of wisdom is
fully purified, and a spontaneous rain of the true Dharma pours down as if from massive rain-clouds
in order to make the harvests of the world’s virtue bountiful.The explanation of
the tenth resolve has thus been completed.

This was the tenth resolve from the Commentary to Entering the Middle Way.

The Ground of Buddhahood

