Since that is what these words communicate:It is the worldly fact that aggregates are fiveWhile
one is placed within the world’s reality.But when the wisdom of reality they seekHas dawned,
for yogis these will no longer appear. (6.91)And since this is the case:

If form is absent don’t assume the mind is real.And don’t insist that form is there without
the mind.When reasoning shows that form does not exist, since the existence of either of them
is then untenable one must concede that mind too can’t exist. And, when mind is understood
to exist, form should be likewise accepted since both are confirmed by worldly consensus.This
may also be seen from the scriptures:The Buddha would reject them equally withinThe
wisdom texts – in abhidharma both were taught. (6.92)The aggregates of form and so forth
were all five equally taught in the Abhidharma, through distinctions such as their unique
as well as shared defining characteristics. And in the Perfection of Intelligence all five
of them were equally refuted in statements such as, ‘Subhūti. Form is inherently empty…,’
until, ‘Consciousness ….’

With this it has been proven by scripture and reasoning that:Dismiss the tiered system of the
dual truth,Your substance is then barred and cannot be maintained.To claim that, ‘form does
not exist, there is only consciousness,’ is to disregard the tiered levels of the relative
and ultimate as has been explained. And while disregarding the levels of these truths,
your substantial existence still remains unproven. What does this mean? Since substantial
existence has previously been refuted, you exert yourself to no avail.Acknowledge thus that
there are levels to the truth:Birth in the world but never in reality. (6.93)

Here they reply: ‘One may well explain the intent of this sutra in that particular way, but
there are certainly other sutras where we also find that only mind exists. As stated:‘Without
external appearancesThe mind appears in various ways,Like bodies, possessions and abodes
–I teach that these are only mind.1‘Here, bodies refer to the sense fields of the eye and
so forth. Possessions refer to objects, such as forms and so forth. Abodes refer to the
world of the vessel. Since nothing exists externally separate from mind, it is only consciousness
that appears in the form of bodies, possessions and abodes, and these are taken to
be external objectively existent things separate from consciousness. Hence, the three realms
are mind only.’The statements of this sutra are also given with intentional ambiguity.
To explain:The sutras where it states that what we see is notExternal, but the mind perceived
in various ways,There was an intention behind this, in thatThat was provisional, taught
to invalidateThe physical for those who are attached to form. (6.94)This provisional meaning
teaching is aimed at those with great yearning for material things, who due to that
lose their free will through being overcome by desire, anger, pride and so forth. Their obsession
with these things leads to much negativity which in turn destroys the merit and wisdom
they have developed. To overcome afflictions caused by material things, the Illustrious
One would thus teach such ones that things are only mind, in the same way that he would
teach about the skeletons that are not in fact there to desirous individuals in order to
overcome desire for external objects.

‘How can one be certain that this is a provisional meaning and not the definitive meaning?’Based
on scripture and reasoning. And in order to show this it was said:The Teacher did express
it as provisional.Provisionality is shown by reasoning.It is not only this sutra that
is provisional in meaning, but others as well:This scripture makes it clear that other sutras
tooOf similar sort will likewise be the leading truth. (6.95)And which sutras are of
a similar kind? When presenting the three natures – the imputed, the dependent and the thoroughly
established – the Unraveling the Intent Sutra2 states that the imputed is nonexistent,
the dependent is existent […], and likewise presents statements such as:Deep and subtle
is the carrying consciousness,Like a river’s current, a flow of every seed.Since it would
be wrong to think of it as the self,I do not teach it to the immature.3As stated:Like a
doctor will prescribe medicineAccording to various needs of patients,In the same way the
Buddha taughtTo beings that there is only mind.4These scriptural quotes make it clear that
this is provisional in meaning. Similarly,[…]: In the sutras mention is made by the Illustrious
One of the tathāgata nature. The Illustrious One describes it as present within the
bodies of all sentient beings, a natural pure perfection, primordially unsullied and endowed
with the thirty-two marks of excellence. The Illustrious One says that it is like a precious
jewel that is wrapped in filthy garments, wrapped in the garments of aggregates, elements
and sense fields, held back by attachment, aversion and confusion, sullied by the taints
of misconceptions, something permanent, lasting and unchangeable. How is this tathāgata
nature the Illustrious Tathāgata speaks of not the same as the ātman taught by the misguided?
Illustrious One, the misguided also describe the ātman as permanent, uncreative, without
properties, pervasive and indestructible.The Illustrious One replied: No, Mahāmati.
When I teach the tathāgata nature, it is not the same as the ātman propounded by the misguided.
Mahāmati, the tathāgatas, arhats, truly complete buddhas teach emptiness, the ultimate
end, transcendence, the unborn, featureless, wishless and so forth as the tathāgata nature.
The tathāgata nature is used to indicate the unapparent state of non-conceptuality so
that immature beings may lay aside their fear of selflessness. O Mahāmati, the future and
present bodhisattvas, great beings, would not maintain belief in a self.Take as example,
Mahāmati, the potter who by using his hands, craftsmanship, tools, water, cord and perseverance
can make pots of various shapes from a single lump of clay. In the same manner, Mahāmati,
the tathāgatas may teach the lack of self of phenomena, the reversal of all conceptual
characteristics, in various modes using intelligence and skilful means such as tathāgata
nature or selflessness when suitable. In a way similar to the potter, they teach using
all manners of terms and expressions.This is why, Mahāmati, the teaching on the tathāgata
nature is not like the ātman taught by the misguided. Through teaching the tathāgata nature,
Mahāmati, the tathāgatas may provisionally lead the misguided who cling to their teachings
on the ātman. Thus they teach the tathāgata nature. It is how those who have ended up
with ways of thinking that conceptualise a real self may gain the perspective that can accommodate
the three liberations, and thus swiftly realise unsurpassable true and complete awakening.5As
it also teaches:Mahāmati. The features of emptiness, non-arising, non-duality
and lack of inherent nature are found in the sutras of all buddhas.6

It has thus been made abundantly clear through this citation that sutras of this type that the
proponents of consciousness take as definitive in meaning are in fact all provisional in
meaning. To explain how reasoning will also show them to be provisional in meaning:The buddhas
taught that when there is no object knownThe knowing of it will be easy to refute.The
known is therefore what’s initially denied,Because without the known the knowing is disproved.
(6.96)The illustrious buddhas introduce students in stages to the lack of inherence.
Meritorious activity makes it easier for one to access the true state of things (dharmatā),
and the teachings on generosity and so forth are therefore given first, as a skilful
method for accessing the true state. Refuting the known is similarly a skilful way of coming
to understand selflessness, and the illustrious ones therefore present the refutation of
knowable objects initially, since those who understand the selflessness of the known object
will find it easy to relate to the selflessness of the knower. In some cases, those who
have understood how knowable objects have no inherent nature, will gain the realisation
of the knower’s lack of an inherent nature by themselves. In some cases they will need some
guidance. The refutation of knowable objects is therefore taught first.

To encourage intelligent individuals to identify other texts in a similar fashion, it is said:And
thus you should discern the level of the text:When what is being explained is not realityBut
leads one, then the sutra is provisional;It is definitive if voidness is the theme.
(6.97)Sutras which do not explicitly express interdependent origination through such particular
attributes as non-arising and so forth, may be described as aids that help one approach
the lack of inherent nature, as when it states:To counteract attachment to formYou
taught about form, saying‘If the eyes do not apprehend the elements,How can they apprehend
what they give rise to?’7And from a sutra:Impermanence means non-existence.8While they are
definitive if the topic matter is emptiness, as found in statements such as the following:Know
that sutras where the Sugata explainsEmptiness are classed as definitive in meaning,While
dharmas where he teaches beings, individualsAnd persons are all provisional in meaning.9And,All
the sutras that I have taughtIn the many thousands of realmsAre identical in
meaning though the words differ,But cannot be fully reiterated.Through contemplating a single
itemOne will be practicing all.Of all the many dharmasExpressed by the myriad buddhas,Every
dharma relates selflessness.And if anyone skilled in the meaningOf things studies this
point,The qualities of Buddha will not be hard to find.10Similar and more extensive presentations
on this matter may be found in various sutras such as the noble Akṣayamati.11To
present one stance on this: The snake is an imputation upon the interdependence of a coiled
rope, because it isn’t actually there. A real snake is thoroughly established because it
is not an imputation. As in this example, inherent nature is an imputation on what is dependently
created. And as we find stated:Inherent natures cannot be fabricatedAnd do not depend
on anything else.12Hence, inherent essences cannot be created. The apprehended and reflection-like
interdependence which is imputed on is the actual fact from the perspective
of the buddhas, since it is then no longer an imputation. Directly perceiving the nature
itself, without reference to created entities, they realise the actual reality, and are therefore
called buddhas.13Such an understanding of the three natures – the imputed, the dependent
and the thoroughly established – as presented here, helps explain the intention of
the sutras. When the duality of apprehended and apprehender does not have a reality beyond
the dependent nature, it should be considered whether these two can in fact be imputed on
the dependent nature. But this digression shall end here, and we now return to the main subject
matter.

Having thus also refuted production from other, now in relation to the refutation of production
from both, it was said:That things arise from both will not be reasonable,Because one
will encounter faults explained above.For the Possibilists (syādvādika), production takes
place both from self and other, meaning that they believe in production from both. A pot,
they say, comes about through factors such as a lump of clay, a stick, a potter’s wheel, string,
water, the potter and so forth. Since the clay and the pot aren’t separate things,
the pot produced exists in the nature of the clay, hence self-production. Since such things
as the work of the potter involved in its production are distinct from it, there is other-production.
This is the idea underlying their belief in both self- and other-production.And
just as with the external environment, individual creatures also come about from self
and other. In this regard they present a list of principles: ‘There are nine principles involved
in this: life-force, inanimate factors, merit, negativity, defilements, vows and so
forth.’ Given that Maitreya’s future birth exists in the nature of his life-force, there
is self-production, because Maitreya and his life-force are not separate things. Life-force
is a component of migratory existence, and these opponents therefore assert that it is a
cause for existences such as that of a god. Since one’s birth takes place through external
factors such as one’s father and mother, religious ways or lack thereof, defilements and
so forth, there is other-production. ‘Hence,’ they say, ‘we are not affected by the statement,
“There is no production from self, nor is there production from other,” because we propose
that there is neither exclusively self-production nor other-production.’This is not
a reasonable argument, as explained: Production from both is likewise unjustified. Why? Since
it would involve the faults already mentioned. Because holding the position of both involves
the faults already pointed out for both positions, production from both is not possible.Because
the pot exists in the nature of the clay there is no production, since it already
exists. As has been explained:If it came from itself there would be nothing gained.What
is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense.14Similarly, it should be acknowledged
that as he already exists by nature of his life-force, Maitreya isn’t then born.Because
the pot is not present in the identity of the water, string, wheel and so forth, it cannot
be produced from them. As has been explained:If it were possible that something else
could be producedBased on what’s other, utter darkness should emerge from flames;And one
would see production of all things from everything,Since in their difference every non-producer
is the same.15The case of Maitreya arising from what is other, such as his father and
mother, may be explained in the same manner.Just as it was previously shown how production
from self and from other is untenable in the worldly relative and ultimately, to now conclude
the above treatment that showed that the reasoning presented by the Syādvādikas does
not work it was said:Not in the world nor actually can this be claimed ...To express that,
we do not merely allude to the reasons presented above that show how production from both
is untenable, but will explain so here as well, it was said:When by each one production
cannot be sustained. (6.98)For example, since a single sesame seed may yield oil, many of
them will as well, while this is not the case for sand where such a capacity is not observed.
Likewise, it is when productive ability is there for individual members that a collection
of such things will have it too. Hence, production from both is unreasonable.

The Substantivists (svabhāvavāda)16 will say, ‘With causal production, the cause and effect
must either be the same, different or both, and then one will run into those problems. But
if I do not assert a cause, those problems will not be an issue. Hence, it is in fact the
case that things arise by themselves. We do not observe anything that deliberately makes
the roughness and smoothness of the fibres and petals of the lotus flower; nor do we observe
anything that makes the various colours and shapes of the petals, stamens and pistils.
The same is the case for breadfruit, pomegranate and so forth. And just as with these things
that are part of the environment, we do not observe anything that intentionally designs
the colours, shapes and so forth of lifeforms such as peacocks, partridges and cranes. The
fact therefore, is that production of things happens naturally.’To comment on this:If causelessly
production could in fact take place,Then endless things would always come from everything.And
people of the world would not in all these waysBe planting seeds and so forth
to make crops appear. (6.99)If things could arise spontaneously, just as the breadfruit
tree wouldn’t then be the cause of breadfruit, all other sorts of things that are not its
cause could also produce it – neem, mango and so forth – since they would all equally be non-causes.
Just as breadfruit could be found on trees that aren’t its cause, it could also
emerge from anywhere in the three realms. And, even though fruits such as mango and breadfruit17
are seasonal, appearing only at certain times, they would then be perennial, not being
reliant on seasons.Similarly, since peacocks wouldn’t be the cause of peacock feathers,
crows would also have peacock feathers; and even at the embryonic stage, peacocks would
always have parrot feathers. Every being would in this way perpetually come into being, but
this is clearly not the case – so to assert naturalness makes no sense.Having shown how
it contradicts reason, to further explain how it contradicts what we can observe it says,
‘… and people of the world wouldn’t then be preparing all these things, like seeds, to make
their crops appear.’ This demonstrates that production doesn’t happen naturally.

Furthermore,If living were devoid of causes one would notPerceive more than the sky-lotus’s
scent and hue.But since the dazzling beauty of the world is seen,Just like one’s mind the
world arises causally. (6.100)If lifeforms were devoid of causality, one wouldn’t come to
have perceptions any more than one does of the scent and colour of a blue lotus in space,
but one does. And therefore you should acknowledge that just as with the workings of mind,
every state of being is causally arisen.According to you, a mental impression of the colour
blue will not occur if one removes the blue object. And since the mental impression of
blue is only there with the presence of blueness, and not by itself, this invalidates the
claim of naturalness.

