Those who believe that mind originates from the elements1 think, ‘Causes are evident and cannot
be denied, because we do see them, and because of the faults you have mentioned. The causal
relationships between things is a fact commonly accepted in the world. There are only
four things that are real: earth, water, fire and wind, and these form the basis for the
endless variety within the world. Not only is it the case that a particular synthesis of
these leads to the varieties of lotus, pomegranate and so forth, and species such as peacock
and crane, that we can observe; sentience and the ability to distinguish between the various
types of things also originate with them. Just as when particular elements combine and
develop, producing the intoxicating capacity of alcohol that causes beings to experience
intoxication and stupefaction, so it is that certain combinations of the major elements
developing from the embryonic stage oblong (kalana) give rise to consciousness and eventually
the ability to distinguish between all manner of things. All the things that make up the
environment and the living beings therefore develop from within this world, and there is
nothing that is now the outcome of karmic acts, nor will the actions of this life have an
effect in future lives after one dies.’My dear, let us enjoy ourselves and eat.What is past
will not haunt you, my beauty.This body is but a gathering of things,O timid girl, what
is gone will not return.2Desiring to have sex with his daughter he spoke thus to convince
her that there are no future lives.To address this: How can you be so certain that there
are no other lives? If they say, ‘Because they can’t be directly perceived,’ is the fact
that you don’t have direct perception of other lives something you directly perceive, or not?
‘I directly perceive it.’ Well, if you directly perceive that there is no direct perception
of other lives, that would mean that non-existent things can also be directly perceived.
And then, non-existent things would be existent for you because they are directly perceived
in exactly the same way as existent things. In that case there would be nothing that
could be labeled non-existent. And without their opposite, existent things likewise cannot
exist. And when there are neither existent things nor non-existent things, that undermines
the existence of elements and non-existence of future lives.If they say, ‘It is not directly
perceived;’ something that is not directly perceived cannot be apprehended precisely
because it is not directly perceived. And how could failing to apprehend be a valid way
to infer the non-existence of future lives?They then suggest, ‘It is apprehended through inference.’
But in regard to using inference as a valid way of proving things, you have made
the claim:There is nothing more to manThan what our senses reveal.What the learned say,
dear girl,Is nothing but a wolf’s trail.3Therefore, if you keep on denying everything, I can
use the same approach used when rejecting that mind comes from the elements to entirely
reject this too.Furthermore, someone with a visual impairment who thinks that there are such
things as two moons when in fact there are not, will also mistakenly see other things
that aren’t really there, such as hair strands, bees and so forth. Similarly, when thinking
that future lives and the like do not exist, because you have a perverted understanding,
you will likewise be mistaken about other things that you see. To express this it was said:If
it’s the nature of the elements that makeYour mental image though its nature it does
lack,How could someone so densely dimmed towards this lifeBe trusted to have knowledge of
the lives beyond? (6.101)How can these four that you talk of, that are of the nature of earth
and so forth, become objects of your mind without sharing its nature? Having such a flawed
way of seeing this world, how could you possibly have any understanding of that which
is beyond this world, a sphere of knowledge requiring exceptionally subtle divine vision?

Furthermore,When you deny that there are lives beyond this one,Your view of how things are is
flawed since such views haveThis bodily existence as their common ground,Like when you make
the claim that elements are real. (6.102)Common (sama) means that there is a similarity
of kind. Ground (āśraya) means that it underlies it.4 Body (mūrti) refers to corporeality.
Such views implies this particular view that rejects past and future lives. Since it describes
it as being a common ground, this is a specifying compound. Bodily existence is the
common ground, and the phrase is thus combined as such views have this bodily existence
as their common ground. A matup-affix is used to give the sense of in whom it is.5 That then
becomes, since such views have this bodily existence as their common ground, supplying
the reason.6Concerning this ground, as long as the mind is thought to be generated from the
elements and no room is left for the possibility of past and future lives, there is a common
ground for this mistaken view of denying past and future lives and when thinking that
the elements are really existent, and the common ground for these types of views of the materialist
is this bodily existence. There are thus two contexts here: one being their understanding
of the natural elements, and the other their denial of past and future lives. Here
in the verse, one of these indicates their stance and the other serves as an example,
when it says, like when you make the claim that elements are real; in that context as well,
it is physical reality which is the common ground for their view, and this view of how knowable
things are is flawed.

They might think, ‘There is nothing wrong in the way I see things when understanding the natural
existence of the elements; so the example that you use in your proof is void.’That is
not so, since the fact that they are unproduced shows that it is a mistaken view to think
that these elements, being in nature non-existent, can have any sense of production or existence.
If they say that we would need to prove that the elements are in fact unproduced,
we don’t, because it has already been proven. To express this:It has been shown how elements
cannot exist,As it was generally disproved things can’t ariseFrom self, other, both, or
without a cause; and soThough not explicit, they have no reality. (6.103)It has been commonly
refuted that existent things can be produced from self, other, both or causelessly,
and since this general refutation showing that there is no production also applies to production
with respect to the elements, they have no inherent existence and the example is therefore
valid. This likewise applies to those who variously refute the Omniscient One, who
propound that entities exist, who propound that entities do not exist, who propound an almighty
god, time, particles, primordial nature or inherence, or anyone else. One may in these
cases adapt the verse accordingly, for example:When you deny that the Perfect Buddha exists,Your
view of how things are is flawed since such views haveThis bodily existence as
their common ground,Like when you make the claim that elements are real.7This will serve to
refute all views that hold on to any form of existence or non-existence. Nothing unwanted
can ever befall us, so by skilfully altering this verse we are certain to eliminate each
and every position our opponents may formulate, thus halting the entire web of conception
and making the ultimate wisdom manifest.They might then think, ‘You are equally affected
by this consequence.’ But we are not, because there is no example that shows our proof to
be mistaken. We may say:When I acknowledge there are lives beyond this one,My view of how
this are is accurate since such views haveThis bodily existence as a common ground,Like when
I claim the understanding of selflessness.Likewise,When I say that the Omniscient One exists
at present,My view of how things are is accurate since such views have…,The reason and
example are the same two; and this may likewise be applied in connection with all things.
With this approach, whatever the thesis may be it remains valid that:It can’t come from
itself, and how from other things?Can’t come from both, how could it be without a cause?8

One may ask, ‘If things are neither produced from self, other, both, nor causelessly, how are
they then produced?’To explain: If things had any sort of inherent existence, no other type
of arising could be conceived of, and one would undoubtedly have to observe that they
arose either from self, other, both, or causelessly. Some might propose that things are produced
from a creator god or the like, but in those cases too, such things as a creator god
would be a self, an other, or both; so those propounding such things as a god to be the
cause, will not therefore avoid the problems already presented. Hence, no fifth cause of production
can be imagined. To express how, in the absence of any other alternative, and since
production by any of these four conceivable options has been refuted, there is no inherent
production of things, it was said:Because things don’t arise from self, other or both,Nor
causelessly, they’re nothing in and of themselves.One might then ask, ‘If things are
indeed without inherent arising, how do we then apprehend the unarisen, such as the colour
blue?’To explain: Since there is no way that a true nature of blueness and so forth could
be objectified, the nature of things such as blue is not apprehended.‘If that is the case,
what are these things which keep appearing as actual objects to our perception?’To explain:
the mistaken is not the actual nature – true identities are only perceived by the ignorant
and not by those free from ignorance. To express this:The clouds of dense confusion lie
across the world,And therefore objects are perceived mistakenly. (6.104)By clouds amassing
rain-clouds are meant. Since thick ignorance, similar to a layer of clouds, blocks the
perception of the nature of blueness and so forth, immature beings cannot perceive the true
nature of blue. They make the mistake of thinking that it has essential nature, and with
this belief the immature perceive it to be real.

They interject: ‘With the actual reality not being in any way seen since it is blocked by ignorance,
how does this mistaken perception then come about?’To show by means of external examples
how things are experienced as real in this way despite this not actually being the
case, it was said:An eye disease may cause mistaken visions likeHairs, double moons, the
peacock eyes, bees and so forth.Just as in instances when things are taken to be real when
in fact not really there, such as when cataracts lead the afflicted to perceive hairs and
so forth…,The unwise, tricked by their confusion, will likewiseBelieve the sundry fashioned
imagery they see. (6.105)The Illustrious One has stated that:Confusion leads to formations.9That:A
person affected by ignorance generates meritorious formations, non-meritorious
formations and unwavering formations.10And likewise that:When ignorance is halted formations
cease.11

Accordingly,It is a sign of witlessness if one declares,‘Confusion causes karma; does not come
without.’Just like the sun of wisdom sheds the nightly gloom,The wise unravel emptiness
and are set free. (6.106)When seeing the statement, ‘Confusion leads to formations,’12 the
judicious not only come to appreciate that formations lack inherent existence. Due to their
understanding they also rid themselves of ignorance and stop perpetuating conditioned
phenomena, having abandoned the causes for their perpetuation. Thus they are freed from cyclic
existence.

They now object, ‘If form and so forth ultimately have no inherent nature whatsoever, then they
are just like the son of a barren woman in having no ultimate existence, which means that
relatively too they wouldn’t have any inherent nature. But form and so forth do have a
relative nature. Therefore, seeing as they have such an existence, they must then have ultimate
existence.’‘If in reality things don’t in fact exist,They’re like a barren woman’s
son and should like himHave no existence also as conventional things.They must therefore exist
as things inherently.’ (6.107)

We reply:Take objects such as hairs, although they are not there,Do still appear to someone
who has cataracts.Thus, first of all, please settle your dispute with them.And then go deal
with those impaired by ignorance. (6.108)First you should then take your arguments to those
who have defective eyesight, such as those suffering from cataracts, and ask them, ‘Why
is it that you see such non-existent things as strands of hair, but not the son of a barren
woman?’ And then you should question those whose mind’s eye is veiled by the cataracts
of ignorance, asking them, ‘Why is it that you see forms that are by nature unarisen, but
not the son of a barren woman?’I am not the one to be censured here. I am quoting the scriptures:
‘that yogis see things in this way, and that others who wish to gain the wisdom of
the yogis should pay attention to the way in which they explain the nature of things.’13
It is through realisation, brought about by yogic wisdom, that entities may be explained
as lacking inherent nature. This is not something taken from my own understanding, since my
mind’s eye is veiled by the cataracts of ignorance. But as is stated:Devoid of nature, the
aggregates are emptiness.Devoid of nature, awakening is emptiness.Anything engaged in is
empty by nature.The wise understand this, the immature do not.With the nature of insight
seen to be empty,The nature of the known seen to be empty,The knower as well is thus understood;This
is called practicing the path of awakening.14And the yogis are therefore not the
ones to be censured; they are the ones who see that no phenomena have inherent nature,
either relatively or ultimately.

So stop censuring the cataract-ridden! First of all take a closer look at yourself. To explain:In
fact you too see things that are not really there,The city of gandharvas, images in
dreams,Illusions, a mirage, reflections and so forth.So, is it not unsound how these appear
to you? (6.109)To take dream perceptions as an example, they are just as non-existent as
the son of a barren woman. Still, one can experience a dream but not the son of a barren
woman. It is the same with the city of gandharvas.15 A mirage refers to the phenomena of water
appearing in a mirage. The same is the case for illusions. When saying reflections and
so forth, the phrase and so forth is meant to include such things as echoes and apparitions.
And although everything in these examples is empty of inherent existence, they can be
seen; but the son of a barren woman cannot. So you should in fact be censuring yourself.
And only after that should you come criticising me.

We may well then say:Though actually these are as unborn asThe barren woman’s son, that does
not meanThat these things are not seen within the world.It’s therefore not conclusive what
you say. (6.110)As the Illustrious One has stated:Beings are explained to be like dreams,And
not considered real in actual fact.Nothing appearing in a dream is real,But people misconstruing
still believe.The city of gandharvas may appear,But there is no such city anywhere.Just
as its city status is but a name,The Sugata sees beings in the same way.16Though
to the observer there is water,No water can be found in a mirage.Just so for those confused
by their ideasThe unappealing is considered fair.17O Druma, though it has no true nature,Within
a spotless mirrorReflections may still appear –You should understand phenomena thus.18So
as this scriptural quote makes clear, even though a true nature has not arisen, material
forms and so forth are perceptible objects to worldly people, while the son of a barren
woman is not, and your argument is therefore inconclusive.

