Those who lack an unmistaken realisation of the sense of the treatise, and are faced with the
maturation of habitual tendencies for real existence developed since beginningless cyclic
existence, cannot bear to hear about what separates them from their cherished fixation for
existence, and therefore resort to nonsense about how the world will invalidate this. Since
one cannot counteract their ravings about worldly invalidation without explaining to
them the many and vast ways of origination in the world, an explanation is at this point given
about the principles of the two truths, in order to clarify the particular cases of worldly
invalidation:The things perceived may either be correct or false.As such all things
convey a dual character.Correctly seen, the object is reality;As taught, the truth is relative
when falsely seen. (6.23)In this context, the illustrious buddhas knowing unmistakenly
the reality of the two truths taught that all external and internal existent things – compounded
phenomena, sprouts and so forth – have a dual nature, namely the relative (saṃvṛti)
and the ultimate (paramārtha). The ultimate is the actual nature accessible in the domain
of superior wisdom for those with genuine vision, but which is not something established
in and of itself – this is one nature. The other is the independent existence perceived
owing to the false perception of ordinary beings whose mind’s eye is completely covered by
the blurring cataracts of ignorance. The objects that the infantile perceive in this manner
are not intrinsically established. All existent things are thereby perceived with these
two natures. And with respect to these two natures, that which is the object of genuine
seeing is the actual reality, which is the meaning of the term ultimate truth. Its nature
will be further explained. That which is the object of false seeing is the relative truth.

Then, having in this way presented the principle of two truths, to now demonstrate that in relation
to those who see falsely there are two ways of seeing, genuine and false, and hence
also a duality in relation to the object and consciousness when perceiving, it was said:As
faculties may function well or be at fault,One further reckons two types of the falsely
seen.Compared to knowledge stemming from sound faculties,What’s known through faulty faculties
is held as false. (6.24)Those with clear faculties, free of cataracts and unimpaired
by jaundice and so forth, unmistakenly apprehend external objects the way they are. The opposite
is the case for those with impaired faculties. Compared to the understanding of those
with sound faculties, the understanding of those with impaired faculties is considered
mistaken.

In order to illustrate that, ‘Just as their understanding may be of two types, either mistaken
or unmistaken, the same is the case with objects,’ it was explained:Perceptions of the
world that happens whenSix faculties have not been compromisedAre true within the world, the
rest are allConsidered false according to the world. (6.25)Internal conditions that impair
the faculties are such things as cataracts, jaundice and so on, and ingesting datura and
the like. External conditions that distort the faculties are oil, water and mirrors, sounds
and so on made inside a cave and the like, and sunlight under particular conditions of
location or time, and so on. These impair the faculties without being internal, causing
perceptions such as reflections, echoes and mirages of water. Magical formulas, potions and
so on, employed for instance by illusionists, should likewise be included within this category.
What impairs the mind are these things, as well as mistaken philosophical systems
and so on, and apparently sound inferences. These are explained in terms of the principles
of dreams and so on. Therefore, the understanding that the world gains through the sixfold
faculties, when none of the mentioned conditions impairing one’s faculties are present,
is considered true from the worldly perspective, but not for a noble one. Reflections and
so forth, appearing with the nature of objects when the faculties are compromised in a certain
way, are mistaken from the worldly point of view.

To provide some examples to illustrate the sense of what has just been explained, it was said:Ideas
diverse misguided thinkers have made upWhen tossed around within the sleep of ignorance,And
notions from illusions, mirages and such,Not even worldly folk will think that these
are real. (6.26)The misguided (tīrthika), in their quest to reach the actual reality,
fail to properly and unmistakenly comprehend the way of production, cessation and so on of
entities well-known even to such uneducated individuals as cowherds, women and so forth.
Their search for perfection resembles letting go of the lower branch before having taken
hold of the higher branch when climbing a tree: their grave mistakes will send them plummeting
into the ravine of faulty views. Not seeing the two truths they fail to reach their goal.
Thus, the three properties (guṇa)1 and so on that they conceive of do not exist even
in the worldly relative sense.

This being the case:Perceptions of the ones impaired by eye diseaseCannot invalidate what’s
known by healthy ones.Just so, a mind which lacks the wisdom beyond taintCannot invalidate
a flawless intellect. (6.27)The refutation of other-production demonstrated here is not a
mere worldly viewpoint. What then? It is the accepted vision of noble ones. This refutation
of production being extraordinary, just as an undistorted apprehension cannot be invalidated
by someone with cataracts disease who perceives hair-strands and the like, undefiled
vision cannot be invalidated by the understanding of ordinary beings lacking undefiled wisdom,
and worldly ones cannot therefore invalidate that which falls within this sort of domain.
They are truly laughable opponents for a noble one. We therefore have two truths, and
by distinguishing between a relative and an ultimate, entities are said to have a dual essence.

In order to describe the worldly relative truth, it was said:It’s relative, delusion, when the
real is masked.Regarding as the truth what is in fact contrivedIs relative truth, this
is what the sage expressed –And that which is contrived is simply relative. (6.28)As it obscures
sentient beings’ ability to see things for what they are, it is confusion; and this
condition of ignorance superimposing non-factual inherent characteristics to things, concealing
the perception of the actual, is the relative (saṃvṛti). This relative causes things
to be experienced as real, and that which lacks inherent nature is seen as inherently distinct.
As this is relatively true for the mistaken world, it is the worldly relative truth.
It is contrived interdependence.Certain dependently arisen things, like reflections, echoes
and so forth, appear as false also to the ignorant, while certain things like blueness
and the like, and such things as material form, mind and feelings, appear as true. The actual
does not appear in any way whatsoever to the ignorant. The latter, as well those things
that also relatively are false, are therefore not the relative truth. As such, the relative
truth is a principle relevant as long as one has the afflicted ignorance involved in
the links of existence.

The hearers, solitary buddhas and bodhisattvas have relinquished afflicted vision, and not entertaining
assumptions about truth they experience conditioned things as similar to reflections
and such, contrived in nature but not real. For the immature these things are deceptive,
while for the others they are dependently originated, like illusions and so forth, and
therefore merely relative. Since they relate to this with only cognitively obscured ignorance,
it does appear to noble ones in the appearance-associated domain, but not while in
the appearance-free domain. Buddhas have fully and perfectly realised phenomena in all their
aspects, and it is therefore held that they have arrested the movement of mind and mental
factors for good. The Illustrious One thus taught that there is the relative truth and
the merely relative.What is ultimate for ordinary beings is merely relative in the appearance-associated
domain of noble ones, while the ultimate for the latter is its emptiness-nature.
The buddhas’ ultimate is the very nature itself. As this is undeceiving it is the ultimate
truth, and something they have a direct personal experience with. Since the relative
truth is deceptive it is not an ultimate truth.

Having covered the relative truth, the ultimate truth should be described. That, however, is
impossible to explicitly indicate because it is ineffable and not a knowable object. To elucidate
its nature to those who are interested with something they are familiar with, an
example is therefore employed:That faulty image one presumes – those falling hairsWhich come
when one is suffering from an eye disease –Is seen for what it is by one with proper sight;At
present we may thus deduce reality. (6.29)Witnessing how someone suffering from cataracts,
through the influence of that ailment sees such things as accumulating strands of
hair filling for instance the rhinoceros-bowl he is holding, and his struggle to get rid of
them by repeatedly upending the bowl, the one without cataracts might wonder, ‘What is he
doing?’ and approach him. And even though she directs her eyes to the area of the supposed
hair she does not perceive any hairs, and will also not entertain concepts of particular
attributes related to these hairs, such as being things or non-things, hairs or not, dark
blue and so forth. So, when the cataract-ridden individual relates his thinking to the one
without cataracts, saying, ‘I see hairs,’ the other will want to clear away these concepts.
And although she will certainly reject the perspective of the one with cataracts, and
say, ‘There are no hairs,’ she isn’t actually denying them. The healthy one sees the actual
reality of the hair-strands; the other doesn’t.Similarly, the nature of the aggregates,
elements, sense fields and so forth perceived by those impaired by the cataracts of ignorance
and unable to see the actual reality, is the relative nature of these things. But like
the cataract-free individual looking at the hair-strands, when the illustrious buddhas who
are free from the habitual patterns of ignorance view those very aggregates and so forth,
they see their real nature, and this is their ultimate truth.

‘But there couldn’t be any seeing of such a nature, could there? So how do they then see?’ Though
that is true, it is said that, ‘It’s by not seeing it that they see.’ As indicated at
length in the noble Accessing the Two Truths:Devaputra. If ultimately the ultimate truth
was a physical, verbal or mental object, it couldn’t be considered the ultimate truth; it
would be the relative truth. Ultimately, Devaputra, the ultimate truth is beyond all conventions,
undifferentiated, unproduced, unceasing, and beyond something expressed and an expressing,
something known and a knowing. The ultimate truth, Devaputra, transcends being an
object of the omniscient wisdom of those endowed with the most supreme of all aspects, and
isn’t expressed by words such as ultimate truth. All phenomena are false; they are deceptive
phenomena. The ultimate truth cannot be described, Devaputra. Why? No such phenomena
as someone showing, something shown and someone shown to can appear ultimately. And non-apparent
phenomena cannot explain non-apparent phenomena.2Thus, distinctions such as objective
entity and non-entity, own-entity and other-entity, truth and non-truth, durability and
termination, permanence and impermanence, happiness and suffering, pure and impure, self
and non-self, empty and non-empty, characteristics and characterised, oneness and difference,
arising and ceasing and so forth cannot be found in the actual reality, because it has
no observable nature. Only noble beings therefore have a valid consideration of actual reality
– those who are not noble beings do not.

If one insists that the world can invalidate it, and professes that the worldly perspective
is a valid way of analysing actual reality, then:If worldly standards were correct the world
would seeReality; what need for other noble ones?Would there be reason to traverse the
noble path?It’s senseless that the standards of a fool are sound. (6.30)If one were to accept
that the worldly perspective is valid knowledge, and that the actual reality is seen by
them, one would have to accept that they have relinquished ignorance, because a fool having
valid knowledge is unreasonable. Someone who lacks understanding of a certain object is
considered unreliable in relation to that thing, such as someone who lacks knowledge of
how to examine precious stones. If the eyes and so forth could ascertain the actual reality,
then endeavouring in moral discipline, learning, contemplation, meditation and so forth
in order to actualise the noble path would be pointless. Hence this cannot be the case.

