Now, in terms the emptiness of the internal, it was said:This being what their nature is,The
eye is empty of the eye –The same is true for ears and nose,For tongue, for body and the
mind. (6.181)

They neither last nor disappear.Hence all these six, the eyes and such,Possess no nature of
their own.This is the inner emptiness. (6.182)To give a brief quote:Which internal things
are indicated by the emptiness of the internal? The eyes, ears, nose tongue, body and mind
are the internal. These do not constantly remain, nor do they disappear; eye is therefore
empty of eye. Why? Because that is its nature.1For things to constantly remain2 would mean
they wouldn’t lose their nature. Since they also remain for time a before changing, it is
stated that they ‘don’t just disappear.’ As these statements show, any entity having a nature
would by necessity be neither constantly remaining nor simply disappearing. As stated:A
true nature originating due to causesAnd conditions, is not tenable.A true nature coming
from causesAnd conditions would be fabricated.And how could it be acceptable to sayThat
a true nature is something created?A true nature cannot be something created,And cannot not
rely on anything else.3One may ask whether a nature as specified by the Master in the Treatise
exists as it is asserted by the Master? As the Illustrious One taught it:Whether the
tathāgatas appear or not, the nature of reality remains the same.When it says the nature
of reality, whatsoever that may be, it is the nature of the eyes and so forth. And what
is their nature? It is that which is unfabricated and not reliant on others, the nature itself
that is realised by a mind that is free from the cataracts of ignorance. And if one asks
whether this is something existent or non-existent? If it doesn’t exist, for what purpose
do the bodhisattvas practice the path of the perfections? It is precisely in order to
realise this reality of things that the bodhisattvas undergo all of these immense hardships.
As is stated:O son of good family. The ultimate does not arise, does not cease, does not
disappear, does not come, does not go, and cannot be expressed in words. It cannot be put
into words and cannot be conceptualised. The ultimate, O son of good family, is something
ineffable known through the discriminative wisdom of noble ones who are at peace. The ultimate,
O son of good family, is unaffected by whether tathāgatas appear or not; by whether
bodhisattvas shave off their hair and beards, don the saffron robes, leave householder life
with genuine faith and go forth into homelessness for the sake of it; nor after having
gone forth by their degree of diligence they demonstrate, as if their hair or robes were
on fire, in order to attain this reality of things. If, son of good family, the ultimate did
not exist, a life of purity would be meaningless, and it would be pointless for the tathāgatas
to appear. Since the ultimate exists, bodhisattvas can be said to be knowledgeable
about the ultimate.4

Some might react to this, saying, ‘My word! Not agreeing that it is anything at all, and still
professing it to be a nature that is an accidental unfabricated something that does not
rely on anything else; your assertions are completely contradictory!’Let me explain. You
haven’t understood the point the Treatise is making. Its intent is this: If the interdependently
arisen nature of the eyes and so forth was of the nature that immature beings perceive
them to be, that nature would be something mistakenly understood, and a life of purity
would then be meaningless. But since this is not its real nature, to find out what that is,
a life of purity has meaning. It is from the perspective of the relative that we express
it to be unfabricated and not dependent on anything else. And this, which immature beings
cannot see, is considered the nature. And being in that fashion, the ultimate is neither
an existent thing nor a non-existent thing, since it is by nature pacified. And the Master
does not only assert this nature for himself, but as this point can potentially be convincing
to others, this nature is presented as something provable to both parties.Some say that
the nature of something like fire is that it is hot and so forth, but this is completely
unacceptable, because in being interdependently arisen it is something artificial and reliant.
It does not make sense to say that since it is something existent it does not have
artifice and is not reliant on something else, because when there is a relationship of attributes
it is not something with any conclusive reality, and such aspects have relevance
on the relative level. But enough digression. We shall now return to the main topic.By saying
that the eyes and so forth are empty of being eyes and so forth, their emptiness of a
true nature has been made clear. It is not an emptiness of one thing being empty of another,
as if saying that the eye is empty because it has no inner creator, or is empty of a real
dualism of subject and object.

As for emptiness of the external:This being how their nature is,A form is empty of a form.And
this is true of sound and smell,Taste, texture and phenomena. (6.183)

That form and such are nature-less,This is the outer emptiness.As stated:What is emptiness of
the external? What we call external phenomena are forms … [and so forth]. These do not remain
constantly nor do they disappear, and form is therefore empty of form, because that
is its nature.5That what is both is nature-less,Is outer-inner emptiness. (6.184)As stated:That
external internal phenomena have no inherent nature as external internal phenomena,
is what we call external internal emptiness. …6

That everything is nature-lessIs what the wise term emptiness.This voidness too is empty ofA
nature which is emptiness. (6.185)

The voidness of the void is termedThe emptiness of emptiness.And this was taught to stop the
mindThat clings to emptiness as real. (6.186)As stated:What is the emptiness of emptiness?
The emptiness of emptiness is the emptiness which is empty of the emptiness that is all
phenomena’s emptiness.7This was taught to counteract the clinging of those who believe emptiness
to be something real. As stated:To defeat all conceptual ideasYou taught the nectar
of emptiness.But you severely reproached thoseWho ended up clinging to that.8

The universe and all that livePervade throughout; it’s infiniteJust like the four immeasurables;Hence
the immensity of space. (6.187)The worlds of the beings and the environment are
not found anywhere other than in the directions of space, which means space completely pervades
all that live. The directions of space are therefore immense. When meditating on love
and so forth one does so through extending it throughout the directions, which serves as
an example for the immeasurability of the directions, showing how boundless it is, and therefore
immense.

The emptiness of space with tenDirections is the emptinessOf the immensity, thus taughtTo block
thoughts of immensity. (6.188)As stated:What is the emptiness of immensity? The eastern
direction is empty of the eastern direction. …9The emptiness of immensity was taught to
counteract belief in the immensity of space for those who think space is immeasurable. The
Vaiśeṣikas do consider the directions of space to be something substantial in this way.

Nirvana is the ultimateBecause it is the highest goal.That that is empty of itselfIs voidness
of the ultimate. (6.189)

To counter all conceptions ofNirvana being something real,The Knower of the UltimateTaught voidness
of the ultimate. (6.190)As stated:What is the emptiness of the ultimate? The ultimate
refers to nirvana. Since it neither constantly remains nor disappears, nirvana is empty
of nirvana. …10This was taught to counteract the clinging of those who believe nirvana to
be something real. The word parama11 denotes the objective or that which is to be understood.

