At this some may reply: ‘You will be liable to the same criticism as when saying that cause
and result must either be in contact or not during production. How so?’‘Does your critique
make contact with the criticised, or does it not?This may be asked, and aren’t you then accountable
to this same fault?’‘If, during these critical remarks, the criticism makes contact
with the criticised, there will be the same problem. And equally so if it does not make
contact. Discarding these two options there is no other notion possible.’‘Thus, as your
criticism does not have the power to discredit the criticised, your criticism itself is discredited,
and as a matter of course the reality of causes and results are then established.
To express this point:’‘As what you say will only serve to quash the view you hold yourself,Your
criticism lacks the power to discredit what you aim.’ (6.171)

‘Furthermore,‘Because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequenceAnd your denial
of existent things is quite unreasonable,Insightful persons will not be convinced by what
you have to say.You argue just to quarrel and have no position of your own.’ (6.172)‘That
your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence has already been mentioned. That your
denial of existent things is quite unreasonable shall now be explained. How to respond
to the argument that things that are equally not in contact do not produce anything? A magnet
will exert a pull on metals close to it without touching them, but not on all. And eyes
can see forms within their scope without touching them, but not all. Similarly, even though
causes can produce things without contact, that does not mean that everything not in contact
with it will be produced. Also, you’re arguing just to quarrel: to argue just to refute
others’ position without presenting any position of your own, is to argue just to quarrel.
And you don’t have any position of your own, because your own presentation is made purely
to refute the position of others.’

To this we reply:To claim that it’s an issue whether this critique makes contact withThe criticised
or not while criticising will only applyTo those thinking in absolutes, but we do
not endorse a stance,And therefore this unwanted consequence does not apply to us. (6.173)Concerning
the statement because your cavilling is subject to the self-same consequence; it
is not in fact the case that this consequence applies equally to ourselves, because in our
point of view the critique does not make contact with the criticised while criticising,
nor does it not make contact, since neither the critique nor the criticised are inherently
established.Do not therefore entertain the idea that there must be either contact or not.
As stated:[…]: … Venerable Subhūti. Does the attainment when not yet attained already exist
as something, or does it not?Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra. I do not think the
attainment when not yet attained already exists as something, nor that it does not already
exist as something.Śāriputra said: But, venerable Subhūti, is there then no attainment and
no realisation?Subhūti replied: Venerable Śāriputra, there is both attainment and realisation,
but not in a dualistic manner. Attainment and realisation are worldly conventions,
venerable Śāriputra. The stream-enterer, once-returner, non-returner, arhat, solitary buddha
and bodhisattva are worldly conventions, but ultimately there is neither attainment nor
realisation.1Here, that the attainment attained can exist or not exist as something is refuted
as duality would be a consequence, and duality is unreasonable for a non-entity, so
attainment is accepted as a worldly convention when not analysed. Similarly, although the
criticised and the critique neither connect nor do not connect, there can still be the convention
of the critique discrediting the criticised.

Also,As when the features of the sun being eclipsedAre also seen in its reflected silhouette,That
sun and likeness meet or not is ludicrous,It happens in dependence, just conventionally.
(6.174)

Although unreal, it helps us beautify our face.Just so, these arguments that have the power
toRefine the face of wisdom can’t be verified.And still, know that the proof they give is
realised. (6.175)What we call a reflection is not real in the slightest, so it is neither
here nor there to think that it must occur in contact with the disc of the sun or not. And
still, with a certain proximity to the form, one will certainly have the perception of the
reflection as expected. It is the same with the critique that is empty of inherent existence
but can still discredit the criticised, and the argument which is empty of inherence
and can’t be verified, but can still prove what it sets out to prove. One should take from
this that our own words are not subject to the self-same consequence, since it does not follow
that there is a duality.Since it is the very visage of wisdom itself, it is referred
to as the face of wisdom. To refine it means to make it immaculate by removing ignorance.
That they have the power to means that this power or ability is seen in them. Since claiming
that there is this duality does not make sense to those for whom it is an imputation,
they will not be able to harm the Middle Way in any way whatsoever with critiques and replies
based on this duality. As Āryadeva states:However long one may attemptOne cannot pinpoint
any faultIn he who holds to neither stance:‘It is’, ‘is not’, ‘is both’, or ‘none.’2Likewise:When
the argument is emptinessAnd someone offers a reply,It’s just like no reply at
allAs it assumes what’s being proved.3This also clarifies the case of productive causes.
Some4 , however, will suggest that the Middle Way Treatise is here dealing specifically with
productive causes and not with rhetorics, that the conflicts involved in contact versus
non-contact apply to rhetorical causality and not productivity, and that this is why we are
not guilty of making spurious arguments.5 But this will not suffice as a reply. One will
not find the opponent very amiable when saying things that are so encumbered by problematic
issues, and since rhetorics are alike to productivity in having such issues, this in an
insufficient reply. Also, in their attempt to deflect the accusation of spurious reasoning
they use the arguments they themselves accept to prove the assertions of the Treatise,
only ending up at the receiving end of critiques made by opponents. This is what makes our
own replies all the more elegant.

Furthermore,Yes, if the reason used as proof were something real,And real also the thing that
we attempt to prove,The argument of contact would be relevant.Since it’s not so you’re only
troubling yourself. (6.176)You’re pointlessly wearing yourself out on our behalf by arraying
the faults of a flawed position against a flawless position. For example, if someone
has cataracts and sees hairs, discrediting that there are just one, or are many, that they
are long, circular, black or the like, will have no effect on those with the disease. And
it is the same when in the analysis of causes and results that have no inherent existence
your criticism is based in dualism – it will have no effect. Understand therefore that
the examples presented here, of there being activity without contact – such as the eyes, the
magnet and so forth – are disproved, as the same consequence applies to them.

You give up the straight path of non-inherence for the windy road of philosophical speculation.
Applying your atrocious conceptual handiwork, you gladly block the authentic route. Why
make such immense trouble for yourself?!Furthermore,That all things lack reality we show
with ease.But it’s no easy matter for our challengerTo demonstrate how things exist inherently.Why
tax the world with webs of shoddy pedantry? (6.177)To back up our position we use
the examples of dreams, illusions and so forth, and are thus able to bring about an understanding
that the things of the world lack inherent existence. But it is not as easy to demonstrate
the idea that things have inherent existence, because there are no examples for
that which are agreed upon by both of us. This being the case, we can repel any argument
while none can provide adequate replies.Is there anyone who is encouraging you to continue
this disservice to the world? The afflicted world is like a silkworm trapped in the cocoon
of its own concepts, so why add to that by stringing a tight web around it using the cords
of shoddy pedantry? So give up this squabbling! Things are like reflections, and there
are no such things as particular or universal characteristics, so what does it matter whether
it’s direct perception or inference? There is only one direct perception when it comes
down to it, and that is the wisdom of omniscience.

Also,If having grasped the prior points, now please forgetThis extra censure, that of touch,
expressly made.It wasn’t just for frivolous wrangling this was said,But so that such additional
points are recognised. (6.178)When further types of criticism are already understood
from the arguments directed at the opposing side using the principles of interdependence
and dependent imputation, one should avoid replying to those who ask, ‘Does the cause make
contact with the result during production, or not?’, with this criticism. The purpose of
the Treatise is to counteract conceptions, and since our point has already been made, why
should the Treatise be used to further frivolous wrangling (vitaṇḍa)?6 We are not here eliminating
the others’ positions, because there are no real things to be eliminated. So how
can this be frivolous wrangling? According to how frivolous wrangling is defined, the proper
definition of it involves someone establishing their own position while refuting the position
of others, which means that the definition of frivolous wrangling is not met in any
way whatsoever. Similar additional criticisms may be understood from this point.

The selflessness of phenomena is clarified in the verses beginning, ‘It can’t come from itself
…’ (6.8), until the verse ending with, ‘Analytical reasoning provides swift liberation’
(6.119). The selflessness of the person is dealt with from the verse beginning, ‘They see
how each and every affliction and fault originates with the view of identity’ (6.120), until
this point. To indicate this and express the classifications of emptiness, it was said:That
beings may be freed, this selflessness was taughtIn two ways, of phenomena and personal.In
short, this selflessness was taught as being of two types: phenomenal selflessness
and personal selflessness. Why was selflessness presented in these two ways? As it says, that
beings may be freed: the Illustrious One presented these two types of selfless in order
to liberate beings. The selflessness of the person is taught in order that solitary buddhas
and hearers may be liberated, while both are taught in order that bodhisattvas may be
liberated through attaining the state of omniscience. Although hearers and solitary buddhas
do come to see the mere conditionality of dependent arising, they do not have a complete
practice of the selflessness of phenomena, but only the means of abandoning the afflictions
experienced in the three realms. It is explained that they do have a comprehensive practice
of the selflessness of the person.And to his followers our Teacher taught the sameBy
classifying it in various different ways. (6.179)Apart from this twofold classification of
selflessness, the Illustrious One also taught it in many other ways to suit the various inclinations
of his students.

Concerning these,When emptiness is taught elaboratelyIt is of sixteen types, and when condensedIt
is of four types – this is the approachAdopted in the Greater Vehicle. (6.180)The sixteen
emptinesses are taught in the statement:Furthermore, Subhūti, the Greater Vehicle of
the bodhisattva is the following: emptiness of the internal, emptiness of the external, emptiness
of the external internal, emptiness of emptiness, emptiness of immensity, emptiness
of the ultimate, emptiness of the compounded, emptiness of the uncompounded, emptiness
of the boundless, emptiness of no beginning or end, emptiness of what should not be spurned,
emptiness of true nature, emptiness of all phenomena, emptiness of defining characteristics,
emptiness of the unobservable and emptiness of real non-things.7And after that the four
types of emptiness are taught:Furthermore, Subhūti, things are empty of things. Non-things
are empty of non-things. Self-nature is empty of self-nature. A nature beyond is empty
of a nature beyond.8These emptinesses are what we call the Greater Vehicle. Neither emptiness
nor non-emptiness exist even in the slightest. These are nothing more than relative
conventions, just like form and so forth, useful when instructing individuals. As the Treatise
states:If anything at all could be non-empty,There could be something that is empty.But
as there is nothing at all that is not empty,How could the empty then be?9One should not
declare ‘empty,’‘Not empty,’ ‘both,’Nor ‘neither’ – these are justNominal designations.10

