Now, concerning the sixth resolve, it was explained:On Presence, with their minds now placed
in equipoise,They’re in the presence of the traits of buddhahood.Dependent rising is the
fact they now perceive –And reach cessation, resting in intelligence. (6.1)Having genuinely
actualised the perfection of meditative absorption on the fifth bodhisattva ground, on the
sixth ground the bodhisattvas place the mind in equipoise and see the reality of profound
interdependence. Through genuine actualisation of the perfection of intelligence (prajñā)
they now achieve cessation, unlike before. Lacking superior intelligence they were previously
unable to reach this cessation through the genuine perfections of generosity and so
on. Fully understanding the true nature of reflection-like things, the bodhisattvas have
focussed on the truth of the path on the five bodhisattva grounds, and are now in the presence
(abhimukha) of the traits of buddhahood. Therefore this ground is called Presence (abhimukhī).1

To explain how all other stores of qualities depend on the perfection of great intelligence,
it was said:A single sighted person may with ease escortThe blind in scores wherever they
should need to go.And likewise, for these virtues that possess no sight,It’s insight that
can shepherd them to victorhood. (6.2)Just one sighted person with ease can lead great multitudes
of blind people to their destination, when the other perfections are led by the perfection
of great intelligence, they will reach the ground of the sugatas, Universal Illumination
(samantaprabhā), because of its ability to discern correct and incorrect paths.

Some may inquire, when it was said here that, ‘… dependent rising is the fact they now perceive,
and reach cessation, resting in intelligence,’ how it is that bodhisattvas upon seeing
the dependent origination of dharmas come to see the actual reality of interdependence.
To this we reply that the real essence of this is not something we can access as long as our
mind’s eye is completely veiled by the thick cataracts of ignorance. But it is accessible
to the bodhisattvas dwelling on the higher levels, the sixth and so forth, and therefore
should not be inquired of us, but rather addressed to the stainless bodhisattvas and illustrious
buddhas whose eyes are free from the blurring cataracts of ignorance, as they have
applied the ointment that overcomes the blurring cataracts of ignorance and allows one to
see emptiness unmistakably.

One may then ask: ‘Are not statements of how bodhisattvas, practicing the perfection of great
intelligence, and thus seeing the reality of interdependent origination, recounted in such
sutras as the noble Perfection of Intelligence (prajñāpāramitā) and the noble Ten Grounds
(daśabhūmika)? Would it not then suffice to explain by quoting from such scriptures?’This
will also not do, because it is hard to ascertain their intent. One such as myself is not
able to teach the actual reality from scriptures, or based on my own independent judgement
explain what is stated there. But, by utilising treatises written by trustworthy individuals
containing their infallible explanations, the intent of the scriptures may be ascertained:As
he was one who reached the deepest dharmic truthsRelying on the scriptures and through
reasoning,By following the system of Nāgārjuna,As found within his works, I shall proceed
to speak. (6.3)Just like a bodhisattva practicing the perfection of great intelligence
sees the nature of dharmas just as it is, the noble Nāgārjuna had an unmistaken understanding
of the scriptures, and through the reasoning and scriptural citations in his Middle
Way Treatise he explained in lucid detail how all dharmas are in actuality without any intrinsic
nature (niḥsvabhāva). Thus, just as the noble Nāgārjuna explained the actual reality
of all dharmas using reasoning and scripture, what I shall now say will be in accord with
his manner of instruction.

‘But how,’ some might say, ‘can we be sure that Nāgārjuna unmistakenly ascertained the scriptures?’
This can be gathered from the scriptures. As stated in the noble Descent Onto Langka:In
the south, in the land of Veta,A mendicant renowned as Śrīmat,Referred to by the name
‘Nāga’,Crushing the views of existence and non-existence,Will teach my vehicle in the world,The
unsurpassed Greater Vehicle,And accomplishing the Joyous Ground,He will venture to
Sukhavatī.2And from the noble Great Cloud Twelve Thousand Lines:Ānanda. Four hundred years
after I have passed into transcendence, this young Licchavi named Sarvasattva Priyadarśana3
will become a bhikṣu named Nāga and spread my teachings widely; and eventually, in the
world realm called Pure Illumination (prasādābhā), he will become a tathāgata, arhat, true
and complete buddha by the name Jñānākaraprabhā.4Hence, he unmistakenly ascertained the
scriptures.

The treatises which contain the complete teachings of interdependent origination exactly as
it is, should only be taught to those who have the seed of emptiness within their being from
prior acquaintance, not to others. This is because when they hear about emptiness, some
may develop mistaken ideas which can lead to very unfortunate results. They may give rise
to the perverted conviction that emptiness means ‘non-existence’, and end up entertaining
and perpetuating mistaken views of denying all entities. The teacher must therefore determine
whether they have a good motivation before explaining the view of emptiness to the student.

It is difficult to determine, so how can one be certain that they are a suitable recipient for
the teachings on emptiness and should be taught emptiness? One can reach certainty through
external indications, and to describe what these signs are it was said:Some common people,
when they hear of emptiness,Will find that great delight comes surging from within,A
joy so fervent, filling up their eyes with tears,And causing every single hair to stand on
end. (6.4)Such ones possess the seed of the awakened mind,Are vessels for the teachings on
reality.They should …as they are qualified to receive teachings,… receive instructions on
the ultimate truth,

If one teaches these kinds of students the actual reality, one’s efforts will not be fruitless.
Why is that? Since,As they will see related qualities emerge. (6.5)Not only will these
students not give rise to any negative perverted ideas about emptiness, they will also gain
the qualities that come from learning the view of emptiness. How so? They will relate to
learning about the view of emptiness like finding a treasure, and in order that it may not
be lost:A person who will always live by discipline,Who gives in generosity and cultivatesCompassion,
trains in tolerance, and dedicatesHis virtue to awakening for beings’ sake;
(6.6)Who for the bodhisattvas shows sincere respect,They understand that, ‘If I transgress
the moral discipline I will fall into lower realms and the view of emptiness will be interrupted,’
and thus will continuously and correctly uphold moral discipline. With the thought,
‘Even though I will be born in the higher realms through keeping moral discipline, if
I am poor I will have to work very hard to get the basic necessities such as food, medicine
and dharma robes, and the view of emptiness will be interrupted,’ they give generously.
Thinking, ‘It is when the view of emptiness is encompassed by compassion that it will lead
to buddhahood, and not otherwise,’ they cultivate compassion. With the thought, ‘Anger leads
to the lower states and gives one a poor complexion, which will displease the noble ones,’
they train in tolerance. Since there will not be an immeasurable and uninterrupted causal
and resultant link for the attainment of buddhahood if the practices of moral discipline
and so forth have not been dedicated towards the state of omniscience, they dedicate
these roots of virtue to awakening for the sake of liberating beings. And thinking, ‘Apart
from bodhisattvas nobody else is able to genuinely teach the nature of interdependent origination,’
they have respect for the perfect bodhisattvas.

In this way they will without doubt accumulate an uninterrupted store of virtue for a long time,
and then:And is insightful in the ways profound and vast;In due course such a person
gains the Joyous ground.If this is your objective, hearken to this path. (6.7)The last line
is saying that, ‘If the Joyous ground is your objective, then ….’ This indicates what is
about to be explained.

A quote from the scriptures will serve to illustrate the genuine state of all dharmas. The noble
Ten Grounds states:O victor heirs. The bodhisattvas who have fully completed the path
on the fifth bodhisattva ground, enter the sixth bodhisattva ground engaging with the ten
equalities of dharmas. Which ten? They are all dharmas’ equality as featureless; all dharmas’
equality as without characteristics; and in the same way their equality in being without
arising, unproduced, detached, pure from the outset, unelaborate, without adoption and
without rejection; all dharmas’ equality in being like illusions, dreams, optical distortions,
echoes, a moon in the water, reflections and apparitions; and all dharmas’ equality
in the non-duality of things and non-things. When they realise the nature of all dharmas to
be in this way, through their acumen and resultant tolerance they attain the sixth bodhisattva
ground, Presence.5

Thus, here only the reasoning of the equality of dharmas in being without production6 is explained.
The intention being that, by virtue of that, the other types of equality will be easily
understood. As master Nāgārjuna sets forth in the beginning of the Middle Way Treatise:Not
from self, not from other,Not from both, nor without a causeAre entities ever producedAt
any point as anything.7Ever (jātu) means at any time. The term at any point (kecana)
is a locative relative pronoun (‘support’-word) and synonym for somewhere (kvacid), and can
indicate location, time, or tenet-system. The word anything is a relative pronoun (‘supported’-word)
expressing outer or inner entities. Thus, one could here elaborate the sentence
and say, ‘Outer and inner entities are not produced from self with respect to any place,
time or tenet-system.’ Here, when it says not (na), this relates to production from self
as an argument for existence, and not to being existent, since the refutation of that is
implicit. This should likewise be applied to the other three assertions.Having thus reiterated
this fourfold thesis, in order to prove it through reasoning, it was stated:It can’t
come from itself, and how from other things?Can’t come from both, how could it be without
a cause?The sense of the statement, ‘Not produced from self …’ is as is stated here: ‘It
can’t come from self ….’ The remaining statements should be similarly linked.

How can we be certain of this? As:If it came from itself there would be nothing gained.What
is produced, produced once more – that makes no sense. (6.8)It refers to the production, the
actor in the act of production, meaning the sprout. From itself means that the production
comes from its very own self-identity. Thus, the assertion here is that the sprout’s own
identity cannot produce that very sprout’s identity. Why? If that very identity already
gained was to come from the same existing identity of that itself, there would be no additional
quality achieved at all, since it was existent already.8

To explain how the position of self-production conflicts with reason, it was said, ‘What is
produced, produced once more – that makes no sense.’Immediately following this assertion,
logical reasoning is supplied:To think that what’s produced is then produced againWould mean
that sprouts and such could never be procured.If one claims that seeds already produced
are reproduced, does that imply that its production must stop for the sprout to be produced?
What is there to prevent it being produced yet again? The consequence would be that sprouts,
stalks, buds and so on would never be produced. Furthermore,The seed would be produced
until the end of time –… for the very reason already given. If one then thinks, ‘When
the conducive conditions such as water, time and so on, are present for the production of
a sprout, the seed will transform and the sprout be produced; and since the presence of that
agent, the sprout, opposes it, the seed will then be destroyed. Therefore, the mentioned
faults do not apply here. And since the seed and the sprout are not really different, it
is not the case that it is not produced from self.’ This is untenable, becauseHow could what
will destroy it ever come to be? (6.9)Since seed and sprout are not really different,
it is illogical that the sprout could destroy it – they are thought to be ‘alike in own identity’.

Furthermore,A sprout distinct in shape, hue, taste, strength, ripening,And different from its
cause, could not exist for you.Shape refers to being long, round and so on; colour to yellow
and so on; taste to sweetness and so on; and potential refers to special powers or particular
abilities, such as being a remedy for haemorrhoids which makes haemorrhoids disappear
when applied to the body, or the oṣadhi-herb which enables one to travel in the sky by
merely holding it. Maturation refers to a substance’s special feature acquired as it transforms,
such as the pepper-plant (pippalī) becoming sweet. If the seed and the sprout are
indeed indistinct, that which is the identity of seed should likewise be observed without
difference as the shape and so forth of the sprout. Since this is not observed, just as seeds
from for example garlic, are different from sprouts of for example plantain trees, it
is untenable that they are not different.

One may think that, ‘Since it abandons the seed-phase and attains another phase, the seed can
turn into a sprout.’ In that case:Its former likeness left behind as it adoptsAnother form,
what’s left of its identity? (6.10)Its entity means the thing itself and not something
other. But since with this way of thinking the non-otherness of the sprout would be an impossibility,
its non-otherness is impaired. They may think that, ‘Although the shape and so
forth of the seed and sprout are different, the substance is the same.’ But that cannot
be so. If one does not perceive their shape and so forth, one cannot perceive their substance.

