Here they might interject: ‘I won’t stand for any more of your discourteous talk! You display
some skill in criticising others and have refuted the dependent nature through logical reasoning.
But, in doing so you refute the very relative that you accept, as the arguments
presented render it illogical.’You’re like someone who feigns friendship and serves poisoned
food to the person who has stolen all your wealth accumulated since beginningless time
so that you can get it back. If this is how you prefer to avenge yourself we will relish it.
That is excellent! As,The claims concerning the dependent you have made,I wouldn’t venture
even for the relative.Although they don’t exist, pragmatically I sayThey do, in order
to comply with worldly view. (6.81)For us the relative is not how you independently propose
in your philosophical system that the dependent nature is something realised by the noble
ones’ wisdom. How is it then? Although without existence, since the worldly consensus is
that things exists, we will say so merely to express the viewpoint of the world, since agreeing
with them becomes a remedial method. As stated:The Illustrious One said: The world
may quarrel with me, but I have no quarrel with the world. I accept as existent whatever the
world claims exists. I accept as without existence whatever the world claims does not exist.1

Concerning the relative:For arhats, who have left behind the aggregatesAnd dwell in peace, these
things do not indeed exist.If that was true for those who dwell within the world,I wouldn’t
say that from the worldly view they do. (6.82)For the arhats who have entered the realm
of transcendence with no remainder of aggregates, the relative does not essentially exist
in any way whatsoever. If it was equally non-existent for worldly beings too, then just
as with the aggregates of an arhat, I wouldn’t say that it exists from the worldly perspective.
Therefore, it is in relation to others that I accept the relative, and not from my
own side.

This is only what the worldly claim. And if what they hold must be refuted, then go ahead and
refute them; direct it not at another. To express this:But if you think that they will be
no match for you,Then go ahead and contradict the worldly view.So let the battle of the
world and you commence,And after I shall follow who’s more powerful. (6.83)We would find it
immensely difficult to refute the relative reality of the world. Still, you go ahead and
refute the worldly relative! And if you are not defeated by the world I would have to support
you. But the world will prevail, so I will remain neutral. Let the fight between you
and the world commence; and if you are victorious we shall agree and follow your lead. But
if the world defeats you, that will mean the world is the stronger and we shall follow them.

To this they object: ‘So, although unfounded, you accept the relative out of fear of the world’s
disapproval. You should then also accept the position of mind-only so as not to be disproven
by scripture and statements such as, “They think, ‘The three realms are mind only.’”’2Let
me explain. Failing to recognise the unique nature of the floor mosaic that is the
collected sutras formed by the blue sapphire of the Sugata’s teachings, and thus mistaking
it for water, you profess consciousness to be a real entity. Then, wishing to scoop up some
of this water by asserting consciousness as a real entity, you attempt to rinse and fill
the unfired earthen jar of your intellect causing it to shatter into a hundred pieces,
and become the laughing stock of those who understand its nature. The intent of this sutra
is not as you think.If you then wonder what it is, it was explained:In Present’s presence
bodhisattvas realiseThe three realms to be nothing more than consciousness,And seeing that
eternal makers are disproved,They understand the maker to be mind alone. (6.84)That same
sutra elaborates on this point:… [they] consider in due order the steps of dependent origination.
… ‘In this way this mass of suffering, this tree of suffering, manifests with neither
creator nor experiencer.’ They think, ‘Because of clinging to a creator, acts are distinguished.
Where there is no creator, no acts are ultimately perceived.’ They think, ‘The
three realms are mind only. The twelve links of existence distinguished in the teachings
of the Tathāgata are all based on a single mind.’3As such, having refuted a permanent creator,
they see that relatively it is simply the mind alone that is the creator, and realise
the three realms to be merely consciousness.As for the meaning of the constituent words:
Bodhi (awakening/enlightenment) refers to the wisdom of omniscience; and to be intent (sattva)
on that, to have a wish for or consideration of it, is what is meant by bodhisattva.
Alternatively, bodhisattva is to be guaranteed awakening (bodhi), to possess it, to be there.
Or, bodhisattva may refer to an individual sentient being certain to awaken (bodhi). It
is an abbreviation with the intermediate word omitted.4 Realise (paraiti) means to come
to understand. Presence (abhimukha) implies that one is in the presence of the basic space
of phenomena (dharmadhātu). Present (abhimukhī) is the name of the sixth ground.

Then, having clarified the meaning of this sutra, it is explained how this sense is also presented
a futher sutra:And hence to fuel the insight of the clever ones,Make clear the meaning,
the Omniscient One expressedThese vajra-words in the Descent Onto LangkaThat shatter
lofty mountains of misguided views. (6.85)The verse here indicated by the word these is the
following:The person, continuum, aggregates,As well as conditions and particles,Primary
principle and a creator god,These, I say, are mind alone.5Such is the verse as extracted from
the noble Descent Onto Langka.

To explain the meaning of this it is said:A maker, such as those we find described withinThe
scriptures of the various misguided schools,A person or the like, he could not find – and
so,The Victor said that mind alone creates the world. (6.86)The word misguided (tīrthya)
is used generically, including also Buddhists who entertain concepts about a person and so
forth. From one side these are not actually Buddhist, but are just like the misguided because
they lack an unmistaken understanding of the teaching. This reference is therefore all-inclusive.As
stated:Come! Ask the world, those who claimA person, aggregates – the Sāṃkhyas,The
Aulūkyas6 , the Jains – if any professTranscendence of being and nonbeing.See thus
how the immortal teachingsOf the buddhas, stating the profound,Beyond being and nonbeing,Is
a dharma that is truly unique.7Those who believe in aggregates and so forth may be identified
as non-Buddhists. Respective systems (yathāsvam) refers to each of their different
philosophies. Hence, this is describing how the misguided believe that such things as the
aggregates are creators; and seeing as cyclic existence is beginningless, all sorts of conceptual
ideas have already been or will be thought of. At present there are those such as
the White Renunciates8 who do appear to be teaching about the aggregates and so forth.So,
the meaning the sutra conveys is that the Tathāgata did not observe that a person or the like
is the creator of things, and taught that mind alone creates the world.

We have now seen how the refutation of a separate creator is implicit, and explained how the
word only cannot be used to refute knowable objects. To state in different words how this
does not deny external things, it is said:Awakened indicates awakened to the truth.And likewise
when the sutras speak of only mindIt means that mind alone is foremost for the world.Denying
matter never was the sutra’s goal. (6.87)Just as we use the term awakened (buddha)
as an abbreviation of the expression awakened to reality (buddhatattva), one should understand
that the same is the case when saying that the three realms are mind-only (cittamātra),
implying that mind alone is primary (cittamātrapradhāna), and negating that anything
else is of prime importance. This therefore demotes physical form from the primary role,
but is not a refutation of its existence, saying that mind alone exists and that matter is
nonexistent.

Thus one must necessarily accept the intent of the sutra to be is as we have explained it. But,
considering your tradition:If mind alone in fact was meant to indicateDenial of the physical
reality,Then why indeed was mind too by the Mighty OneDescribed to be from karma and
confusion born? (6.88)The noble Ten Grounds Sutra states that consciousness is caused by
confusion and formations, and not that it is intrinsically existent. A consciousness established
in and of itself wouldn’t be subject to ignorance or formations; however, it does
in fact rely on them. There is therefore no such thing as an inherently existent consciousness.
Just as the perception of hairs for one with cataracts, it exists when a distorting
condition is present, and not when such a distorting condition is absent. As stated:Thus the
bodhisattvas consider in due order the steps of dependent origination. They think, ‘Not
knowing the truths there is ignorance of the ultimate truth. The karma of ignorance ripens
as mental formations. The initial mind based on these mental formations is consciousness.
The four aggregates subject to grasping arising together with consciousness are name and
form. The development of name and form leads to the six sense fields. The defilement that
results from the meeting of faculty, object and consciousness is contact. With contact there
is feeling. Attachment to feeling is craving. As craving proliferates there is grasping.
The defiled karma resulting from grasping is becoming. The result of becoming is birth,
and the emergence of the aggregates. As the aggregates develop there is ageing. With ageing
the aggregates deteriorate and there is death. The intense agony of shock and longing that
accompanies death is grief. The wailing that accompanies grief is lament. Its effect on
the five faculties is suffering. Its effect on one’s mental outlook is despair. Great suffering
and despair ends in torment. In this way this mass of suffering, this tree of suffering,
manifests without a creator, without an experiencer.’9‘Ignorance produces two effects:
it distorts what sentient beings observe, and provides a cause for mental formations to
manifest. Mental formations likewise produce two effects: they make future ripening results
manifest, and provide a cause for consciousness to manifest. Consciousness produces two
effects: it creates a link to the continuity of existence, and provides a cause for name
and form to manifest. Name and form produce two effects: they mutually support each other,
and provide a cause for the six sense fields to manifest. The six sense fields produce two
effects: they display their respective spheres of activity, and provide a cause for contact
to manifest. Contact produces two effects: it provides contact with the object, and provides
a cause for feeling to manifest. Feeling produces two effects: it creates experiences
that are pleasant, unpleasant and neither of these, and provides a cause for craving to
manifest. Craving produces two effects: it makes one desire desirable things, and provides
a cause for grasping to manifest. Grasping produces two effects: as above,10 and it provides
a cause for becoming to manifest. Becoming produces two effects: it creates a basis
for further types of existence, and provides a cause for birth to manifest. Birth produces
two effects: as above,11 and it provides a cause for ageing to manifest. Ageing produces
two effects: it causes the decline of the faculties, and provides a cause for one’s encounter
with death to manifest. And death produces two effects: it causes the destruction of the
compounded, and provides and cause for misapprehension to continue without interruption.’12As
these and similar statements make clear, consciousness is taught to be caused by ignorance
and mental formations.Thus, when corrupting conditions are present, consciousness
comes into being. In what manner is it then absent when they are absent? This is elaborated
upon:‘As ignorance ceases mental formations cease,’ means that when the condition of ignorance
is absent mental formations are stilled and do not persist. ‘As mental formations cease
consciousness ceases,’ means that when the condition of mental formations is absent consciousness
is stilled and does not persist. …13This continues up until:… They think, ‘When
things combine formations increase. When things are separate formations do not increase.
When things amass formations increase. When things do not amass they do not increase. We
have in this way seen the many adversities that accompany conditioned phenomena, and shall
sever this process of combining, this amassing; but shall forsake attaining the ultimate
pacification of all that is conditioned in order that we may bring sentient beings to maturity.’O
royal sons. As they, in this way, consider how this conditioning is riddled with
adversity, lacks intrinsic essence, is unarisen and unceasing …,14This being the case, who
in their right mind would, on seeing the scriptural statements presented here, conclude that
consciousness has substantial existence? Making that assumption is based purely on belief.

Therefore, when saying mind-only, what is emphasised is that mind alone is primary, and this
scripture is not at all implying that there is no physical form. And to indicate how it is
mind that is primary, it is said:It truly is the mind that makes the spectacleThat is the
worlds of beings and environments.It’s stated that all beings’ states are karma-born –Dispense
with mind and there will be karma no more. (6.89)Here, the world of beings refers to
the individual states of existence sentient beings meet with due to their karma and afflictions.
The world of the vessel refers to everything from the wind-maṇḍala up to the celestial
realm of Akaniṣṭha produced by their shared karma. The variegated facets of such things
as the patterns on a peacock’s feathers are produced from the particular karma of that
peacock. The varieties of such things as lotus flowers are produced from the shared karma
of all sentient beings. Take this to apply to all things in general. As stated:Just as when
one is born on Mount Black,It is their karma that decides whetherA being is in hell or
realms divine,If trees will be of weapons or of gems.15Since this is the case, all states
of existence arise from karma and karma again is dependent on mind, the reason for this being
that it is only sentient life that can accumulate karma, and without mind there is no
karma.

It is therefore the mind that is the primary cause for entering the states of existence, not
anything else. This is why the sutras posit that mind alone is primary and not physical form.
Why?Though matter is a fact, it can’t claim to possessThe same creative power that the
mind displays.The thinking being that physical form is an inanimate substance.A maker other
than the mind is thus denied,But that is not to say that matter is disproved. (6.90)Some
claim that such things as the primary principle (pradhāna) is the creator. Some claim that
it is the mind. But there is no disagreement about the fact that material form cannot
be the creator. Therefore, in order to disprove their belief in such identities as the primary
principle as creator, the creative ability that mind alone exhibits is said to be the
creator. The justification for saying this is that, as one has then disproved that such things
as the primary principle can be the creator, one annihilates the topic of the debate.
It is like eliminating one of two opposing kings both vying for control of a country, thus
leading one of them to gain domination of the country and leaving the populace unharmed,
which is important to both. Here too, for the benefit of both, material form is never denied,
so that one may still retain the idea that there is material form.

