We are not affected by this argument; we do not assert that forms and so forth are inherently
produced on the conventional level whilst refuting them ultimately. How so? Since just asA
barren woman’s son cannot in fact be bornBy worldly standards or in true reality.It is
the same with anything, they don’t occurAs true things in reality nor in the world. (6.111)

This being the case,The Teacher thus proclaimed that all phenomenaAre peace from the beginning,
free from any birth,Complete transcendence1 of a nature that is real,Which means that
there is never any birth of things. (6.112)And seeing as we have such scriptural statements,
this means that there is never any production taking place. As a scripture states:When
turning the Wheel of DharmaYou teach that all phenomenaAre primordial peace free from arising,The
transcendence of any real nature.2Since they are the object of serene wisdom, all
phenomena are peace. And why are they the object of serene wisdom? The statement, free from
arising, supplies the reason: it is because they are unarisen. Since they are unarisen,
they are the object of serene wisdom. Why are they unarisen? As stated, there is utter transcendence
of any real nature. If something has an inherent existent nature and this then
were to arise, that nature would not then be existing, and what is there then that arises?
Thus it is taught that there cannot at any point be arising: what did not occur before cannot
then occur later, and what occurs later cannot then transform again. So what then is
there? The utter transcendence of any real nature. The word primordial is used to show that
it is not the case that these are only unarisen in relation to yogic wisdom. What is then
being shown? That also prior to that, in the context of worldly conventions, these are in
and of themselves unarisen. Primordial is a synonym for at the start, and should be understood
to apply to the context of worldly conventional reality. And thus it was that the bodhisattva
noble Sarvanivaraṇa Viṣkambhin gave praise to the Illustrious One expressing his
excellent qualities with the words, ‘When turning the Wheel of Dharma you teach that all
phenomena ….’

Those belonging to our own side do not in fact object to this. How so? Because they accept thatThough
pots and such aren’t there in true reality,The world’s consensus is that they in
fact exist.For all phenomena this is the case, which meansIt doesn’t follow they’re like
barren women’s sons. (6.113)Some think that, ‘When the bases for the imputation exist – earth,
water, fire, wind, form, smell, taste and texture – a jar can be imputed with good reason,
it is well-founded. But if it is the case that everything is nothing but imputation,
and a basis for the imputation does not have any substantial existence, it cannot be denied
that it becomes equivalent to the case of the son of a barren woman.’This is unsound, because
the basis for imputation cannot possibly be substantially established. As stated:Apart
from form and so forthA pot cannot exist,And apart from wind and so forthForm can likewise
not exist.3Similarly:Earth, water, fire and wind do notInherently exist by themselves.Without
three, one cannot be.Without one, there cannot be three.If without three each cannot
be,And without one three cannot be,Then each exists not by itself,And how to then form
a composite?4Just as you wouldn’t grant that the impermanent could arise from the permanent,
it is unsound that something lacking substantial existence could come from something having
substantial existence. As stated:How can impermanent thingsCome from what is permanent?A
cause and effect that are incompatibleCan never be observed.5Thus, based on a collection
of imputedly existent things such as a face, one will observe an imputed reflection in
a mirror. Based on imputed constituent parts such as pillars and so forth, one imputes a
house. A forest is similarly a conceptual designation based on trees. Just as one in dreams
may experience sprouts, that are by nature uncreated, being created from seeds that are
also by nature uncreated, it makes sense that all imputedly existent things, being imputations,
may serve as supports for imputedly existent things. As stated:Through mastery of magical
emanation…Are like the city of gandharvas,Similar to dreams and mirages.This is therefore
not a topic of dispute.6

Now they say, ‘If production from self, other, both and uncaused is refuted on both levels,
how can one then ascertain that such things as ignorance, formations and seeds give rise to
consciousness, sprouts and so forth conventionally?’To explain:And so, since things do not
arise uncaused,Are not the work of an almighty god,Nor are produced from self, other, or
both,They are interdependently brought forth. (6.114)As has been explained, the arising
of things does not happen just naturally by itself; nor does it happen through such things
as a creator god, time, particles, primordial nature (prakṛti), souls (puruṣa), Nārāyaṇa7
and so forth; nor is there production from self, other or both. And therefore it is simply
the case that, in dependence on that, this arises; which ensures that worldly conventions
are not violated. As the Illustrious One has stated:The hallmark of phenomena is this: If
this is present, that will happen. If this has arisen, that will arise. And so, confusion
leads to formations …8Similarly,When there is this, there is that,Like short exists when
there is long.When this takes place, that occurs,Like light emerging from a lamp.9And from
the Treatise as well, where it teaches that it is simply like this:An agent depends on there
being an act,And the act again depends on the agent.Apart from this we see no other wayTo
demonstrate what these are.And assimilation should thus be understood,As act and agent
is then excluded.Through the case of agent and actionAll remaining things can be made clear.10

This explanation of interdependence as a mere conditionality, not only renders implausible any
kind of conceptual notion of production that is uncaused and so forth, but also any other
sort of idea: the dualities of eternalism and nihilism, permanence and impermanence, existent
things and non-existent things and so forth become impossible. To express this:And
as all things arise interdependentlyThese theories will not withstand analysis.Submitted to
interdependence’s argumentsAll complex nets of faulty views are ripped to shreds. (6.115)Since
it is only through the reasoning which states, ‘based on this, that arises,’ that relative
entities can be found to have an existent identity (svātmabhāva) and not through any
other, the view presented here – arguing for a mere conditionality of dependent arising
– tears up the entire net of faulty views. By positing such mere conditionality as dependent
arising, one cannot accept that entities have any inherent nature whatsoever. As stated:Something
arising based on this and thatHasn’t come into being in and of itself.How then
can that which has no self-becomingBe seen as something that has come into being?11Similarly,Interdependent
arising itselfIs called emptiness.This, itself being an imputation,Conveys
the middle way.12And from the sutras:What is born conditionally is unborn,Having no inherent
being of its own.Depending on conditions they are said to be empty –He who understands
emptiness is heedful.13

With an inherent nature impermissible, how can any of these aforementioned explanations then
be maintained in its absence? If there were any kind of inherent nature, other concepts of
production would be permissible: things coming about of their own accord, from self, other,
both, a creator god, or the like; and following that, once things have arisen, concepts
of them remaining permanently, ending in destruction, or the like. But not otherwise. To
express this:Such theories are relevant if things exist,But now it has been shown how things
cannot exist.Without existents such ideas can’t be maintained,Just like a fire won’t keep
burning without fuel. (6.116)The arguments presented have left absolutely no room for
an existent entity. For this reason the yogis who have actualised the noble path and see reality
through non-seeing, do not observe even the slightest existent phenomenon. Also, any
ideas of form and sensation, virtue and non-virtue, things and non-things and so forth,
entertained since time without beginning, are prevented. To illustrate: for someone suffering
from cataracts, applying eye-ointment has the effect of counteracting such mistaken ideas
as seeing hairs, although there is no actual change in the nature of those hairs.

Thus,While ordinary men are trapped by theories,By not pursuing concepts yogis are set free.The
wise have said that it’s analysis which willAlleviate one of conceptual ideas. (6.117)Since
it is only the conceptual ideas that trap ordinary beings who are ignorant of this reality
of things, yogis are liberated when realising this reality. For this reason the master,
as explained in the Middle Way Treatise, clearly sets forth that the result of analysis
is the reversal of each and every conceptual idea. As stated:If things were inherently
existent,What would be the benefit in seeing emptiness?Conceptual seeing is that which binds
us,And that which is refuted here.14

And therefore,He did not for the love of quarrelling presentThe treatise’s explorations, but
to liberate.Thus, when the master gave the extensive presentations of reasoning in the Middle
Way Treatise, he did not do so for the love of dispute, meaning that he didn’t present
them in order to triumph over opponents. He presented these analyses so that beings could
be liberated, thinking how excellent it would be if by presenting the reality of things
through the Middle Way Treatise sentient beings could come to an unmistaken realisation of
this reality and thereby reach liberation.‘But haven’t you been systematically reiterating
all these ideas held by your opponents and then proved them wrong? When using the treatise
in this argumentative way, how can you propose that its purpose isn’t precisely the refutation
of ideas?’Let me explain. Although these analyses were not carried out for the purposes
of dispute, the systems of our opponents being feeble will not be able to hold up in
the face of a presentation of actual reality; they crumble just like darkness in the presence
of light. So the fault lies not with us. To express this:One can’t be blamed if one’s
opponents’ theoriesAre shattered when unravelling reality. (6.118)As stated:Although the
tathāgatas did not teachThis dharma for the sake of dispute,It will incinerate opposing argumentsLike
fire consumes its fuel.15

If this wasn’t the case, and this dharma was taught for the sake of argumentation, one would
definitely develop aversion for the faulty positions of any opponents, end up cherishing
the rational approach of one’s own side, and there wouldn’t be any reversal of conceptual
ideas. How so? As,To be too fond of one’s own view, and hostile toThe views of others, this
is still conceptual.Failing to reverse conceptual ideas results in bondage, not liberation.
But when this dharma isn’t used for the sake of dispute:But when desire and aversion are
dispelled,Analysis will bring one swift deliverance. (6.119)As stated:Great beings are
not partial,Do not engage in arguments.How can there be opposing viewsFor those who are impartial?16Similarly,Attached
to your own position,And disliking the position of others,You
will not reach transcendence.Dualism does not bring peace.17And from a sutra:If attachment
develops when learning the DharmaAnd dislike stirs when hearing non-Dharma,Pride and conceit
become one’s downfall –Pride is a catalyst that furthers suffering.18

The selflessness of phenomena having thus been demonstrated through scripture and reasoning,
there now follows a presentation of the selflessness of the person:They see how all afflictions
and all faultsCome from the the view of an identity.And realising its object as the
self,The yogi goes on to refute this self. (6.120)The view of identity19 is to have an afflicted
investigative mind that works in terms of the thoughts ‘I’ and ‘mine.’ They originate
with it, meaning that the identity view is what brings them about. And what are they?
The afflictions and the faults. Afflictions refer to desire and so forth. Faults refer to
birth, ageing, sickness, death, grief and so forth. Every last one of these stems from the
view of identity. The sutras state that all afflictions:… have their root in the view of
identity, have their cause in the view of identity, originate with the identity view.20When
it states that they have their cause in the view of identity, this means that the view of
identity is the cause for all of them, since mental formations will continue to be created
and the suffering of birth and so forth will continue to manifest for those who have not
given up the view of identity. Its reference point is the self, since self-clinging has
a self as its object. So when desiring to get rid of each and every affliction and fault,
it is actually the view of identity that should be abandoned; and that again is removed when
having understood the selflessness of the self, which is why the yogi will first refute
the self. With that refuted the view of identity too is discarded, which in turn fully counteracts
afflictions and faults. Analysis of the self is therefore a means to accomplish
liberation. Hence, at the very beginning yogis start by analysing the self, asking: ‘What
is this so-called self, the reference point for the view of identity?’

