Some might think: ‘Say one accepts that not being inherently produced it is not spent,1 and
this is why there can be a ripening result. In that case, since the ripening manifests without
it having ceased, there will likewise be another ripening after the initial ripening
has taken place because it hasn’t been spent. And, since after that ripening there will be
yet another ripening, this leads to the fault of infinite regress.’ This will not be the
case:Just as with cataracts one will see hairsAnd not just any other random thing,Although
as non-existents they’re the sameThe ripened won’t be ripening again. (6.41)As an example,
take objects that are similar in that they are nonexistent: someone with cataracts will
see nonexistent objects such as strands of hair, but not the appearance of other types of
things, such as a donkey’s horns and a barren woman’s child. Likewise, while the natures of
karmas are equal in their non-cessation, they have specific ripening results.

This example not only shows that karma isn’t unspecific, but also that its maturation is specific.
To explain:The negative will therefore further woe,While virtues lead to what is fortunate.It’s
freedom to see neither good nor bad.To question karmic links was still deterred.
(6.42)Though virtuous and non-virtuous karmas lack intrinsic essence, still, just as there
is a sense of certainty for the one seeing hair strands, non-virtue will not have have
a pleasant outcome while virtue will not have an unpleasant outcome. When not apprehending
karma as virtuous and non-virtuous one is liberated. The Illustrious One saw that if ordinary
beings were to enter into very detailed analyses of it, they could end up denying karmic
consequences and demolishing the relative. Stating that, ‘The workings of karmic consequences
are inconceivable,’ he thus discouraged speculation about the workings of karmic
actions and results.

‘If this is how the relationship between karmic actions and results is posited, when it is stated
in the Descent Onto Lanka2 that the substrate consciousness is the basis of all the
unlimited particular potentials, containing the seeds that cause the production of all things,
like the ocean is for the waves, can this then be something utterly unproduced in every
respect?’That is not how it is, because the statements presenting this as something existent
were given in order to instruct disciples. It should be understood that it is as an
approximation of the nature of all things that what is in fact emptiness is described with
the term substrate consciousness. Not only is the substrate consciousness then existent,
but the person too exists – such statements of their existence are given in order to nurture
individuals who need to be trained. It was for instance stated:O mendicants. The five aggregates
are the burden. The carrier of the burden is the person.3To some it was taught that
there are only the aggregates; and terms such as mind, mentation and consciousness were
used when explaining that, ‘By immersing oneself with faith, moral discipline and so forth,
one will improve, and in future lives take rebirth in the higher realms.’ But all such
teachings were given with intentional ambiguity.If one wonders what the intention behind
them was, it is said:And so, for those who are not able toAccommodate the most profound of
views,He taught a substrate, that the person doesExist, that aggregates alone exist. (6.43)The
kinds of students who have previously had prolonged exposure to misguided (tīrthika)
views will struggle to assimilate the profound nature of things (dharmatā), and become frightened
when hearing statements such as, ‘I am not, nor will I be ….’4 When from the very
outset they relate to the instructions of the Teacher like they would the edge of a precipice,
backing away from it, they will not accomplish the supreme goal. By initially presenting
them with such topics as the substrate consciousness, their misguided beliefs are counteracted
as they are steered towards the greater purpose of these instructions. Since they
will later, when gaining an unmistaken understanding of the teachings, naturally abandon
these, it is definitely a beneficial approach and in no way mistaken. As Āryadeva explained:One
should first of all assessTheir particular inclinations.If estranged they will never
becomeVessels for the sacred Dharma.5

For didactic reasons not only did he teach topics such as the substrate consciousness, but also:He
taught by saying I and mine, althoughFree from the view of an identity.And likewise,
though things lack inherent truth,He taught provisionally that they exist. (6.44)Although
he had relinquished any ego and mine by leaving behind the identity view in its entirety,
as worldly convention uses terms such as I and mine as a means of communication, the Illustrious
One taught using the expressions I and mine. Similarly, although things do not have
an intrinsic nature, teaching that they exist can be a means for leading the worldly to
understanding, and thus he taught their existence.As stated at length in the Verses Agreeing
with the Pūrvaśaila School:If the guides of the worldDid not conform with the world,Nobody
would know about BuddhaOr the Buddhist teachings.While knowing that the aggregates,Elements
and sense fields are of one nature,He taught about the three realmsTo accord with the
world.Though phenomena are unnameable,He expressed himself to beingsUsing an inconceivable
variety of termsTo accord with the world.He taught the non-existence of things,While dwelling
in the nature of awakeningWhere there is no non-existence at all,To accord with the
world.Though seeing no objects nor non-objects,The supreme of speakers professedCessation
and the ultimate truthTo accord with the world.Though being without destruction and creationThings
are equal in the realm of phenomena,He taught about the inferno of the aeonTo accord
with the world.Although the nature of sentient beingsIs not observed throughout the
three times,He taught about the characters of beingsTo accord with the world.6

