An external example is now provided to clarify the point that the self is an imputed idea as
just explained:A chariot is not distinct from its own parts,Nor indistinct, and their possessor
it is not,It is not in its parts, they aren’t contained in it,It’s not the mere assembly,
nor is it the shape. (6.151)Five of the positions mentioned here have already been
covered previously: that of sameness, difference, support, supported and possessor.

The positions of a collection and of shape needs to be demonstrated, and are therefore now explained:If
just the mere assembly were the chariot,The chariot would be there in the separate
parts.This point has been previously made. It is here revisited since it provides clarification
by mentioning additional faults. It may then be said:Without an owner of the parts
they can’t be parts.The chariot as shape will neither make much sense. (6.152)Since there
can be no parts when there is no owner of the parts, the parts do not exist. How can their
assembly then be the chariot? Here the word also (api; here: neither) is used in an inclusive
sense and should be understood to include the unreasonableness of either the mere
shape or the mere assembly being the chariot. How so? Because they cannot be parts if there
is no possessor of parts. For the mere shape to be the chariot does not then work. The
non-existence of the possessor of the parts is accepted by those belonging to our own side.1

Furthermore, if the shape is claimed to be the chariot, is it then contended that the shape
is that of the parts or the collection? If it is suggested that it is the shape of the individual
parts, do they still have their former shape, or have they left it behind? That they
have not left it behind makes no sense. Why?You say the shape that each part had beforeIs
present now within the chariot.Then just as when it was in separate parts,It’s not there
now when there’s a chariot. (6.153)If the particular shapes that the wheels and so forth
had before there was a chariot are exactly the same as the particular shapes of the wheels
and so forth when there is a chariot, then it follows that just as the chariot is not there
when they are disassembled, it should equally not be there even when they form a chariot,
since its shape is indistinguishable from that of the parts.

In case of the second position, that only with a difference in shape is there a chariot, then:And
if right now, when there’s a chariot here,The wheels and so forth have a different shape,Then
this should be perceived, but it is not.The chariot is thus not just the shape.
(6.154)If the particular shapes (square, long, round and so forth) that the individual parts
(wheels, axle, nails and so forth) had before were to have distinctively different shapes
when they constitute the chariot, then this should be perceptible. But we do not see that.
We do not see the wheel’s spokes, rim, hub and so forth to have other shapes when mounted
on the chariot. The squareness and so forth of the axle and other parts are likewise not
transformed into something else. Hence, it makes no sense for the chariot to be the shape
of its parts.

One might think, ‘It is the particular shape of the gathered parts, wheels and so forth, that
is the chariot.’To explain how this likewise does not make sense:For you, collections are
not real at all,Its shape is thus not that of gathered parts.For how could it assume a shape
at all,Based on something that’s utterly unreal? (6.155)If a so-called collection had
the slightest real existence, it could serve as the basis for the designation of a shape.
But this collection of parts is not a real entity at all. And how can that which has no existence
whatsoever serve as a basis for the imputation of a shape, when it is claimed that
imputations can only be made based on something substantial?

They assert that, ‘Though it is unreal, in dependence on this collection there is an unreal
shape.’ And that’s exactly it:But it is just as you yourself assert,That based upon a cause
that is unrealArise results that are themselves unreal.Please see that this is how all things
occur. (6.156)Unreal formations come about based on unreal ignorance. Unreal sprouts
arise from unreal seeds. All causal relationships should be understood to have this character
of unreality. Why completely exhaust oneself in the pointless pursuit of real things,
like chasing the shadow-deer whose meat one cannot eat?

This shows it makes no sense that the ideaOf pot comes from these bases such as form.There are
some who say that it is upon such bases as form and so forth that ideas of pots and so
forth are made.2 But the example of the chariot disproves this as well.Furthermore,And being
unproduced these don’t exist,That they comprise a shape is hence unsound. (6.157)That form
and so forth are not produced has been explained previously. And not being produced, form
and so forth do not exist. How could it make sense for things that do not exist to be
the cause of imputations such as pot? Hence, to claim that pots and so forth is the assimilation
of something substantial does not make sense, and therefore pots and other things do
not inhere in the particular shapes of the physical constituents and so forth.

Here it might be interjected: ‘But if the chariot is found not to exist when scrutinised in
the sevenfold manner just explained, without the existence of the chariot the conventional
designation of chariot employed in the world would be invalidated. However, we do see the
use of such commands as, “Fetch the chariot!”, “Please buy a chariot,” “Please mend the chariot,”
and so forth. Based on general consensus then, things such as chariots must exist.’To
respond: It is in fact you who end up with this problem. A chariot is found to be untenable
when subjected to the scrutiny of the sevenfold analysis explained above, but you refuse
to accept that there are alternative ways of allowing existent things to remain valid.
How can such worldly conventions as the statement, ‘Fetch the chariot!’, then retain their
validity for you? We are not affected by this problem, because:These seven points leave
it unjustifiedBoth in reality, and in the world.But left unanalysed the world will stillIdentify
it based upon its parts. (6.158)When scrutinised in this sevenfold manner – by saying
that the chariot is not distinct from its own parts and so forth – one cannot prove that
there is a chariot either ultimately or relatively. But if analysis is suspended, just
as there are things such as the colour blue or the experience of feelings, it is still the
case that in the worldly context it is imputed in relation to its parts, such as the wheels
and so forth. The consequence that worldly conventions will be violated does not therefore
apply to us, because the assertion of a dependent imputation is similar to asserting
the mere conditionality of dependent arising. Our opponents would therefore do well to accept
this.

With this position, not only does worldly consensus make the usage of the conventional designation
chariot perfectly clear, but the particular implications of the term will also, when
not subjected to analysis, be acceptable according to worldly norms. As such,It’s something
that has parts, composed of separate bits.A chariot is held to be a functional thing.For
people it is real as what assimilates.The chariot is something that has parts based on
the fact that it consists of parts such as wheels and so forth. And it is composed of separate
bits from the fact that its bits are the wheels and so forth. It is a functional thing
in relation to how it assimilates the constituent wheels and so forth. It is posited as
an assimilator in relation to what it assimilates.There are some with a mistaken understanding
of the scriptures, who say that the mere collection of parts exists, but the possessor
of the parts has no existence whatsoever, because it is not apprehended as distinct from
them. They likewise say that only the bits exist but not what they compose; that only the
action exists but not the actor; and as nothing is perceived apart from the assimilated,
the assimilated exist but the assimilator does not. And when they adhere to this distorted
description of the worldly relative, the consequence of their own argument will be that the
parts, and so forth, too are non-existent.Do not lay waste to what the world agrees upon!
(6.159)This should certainly be avoided.

It is a fact that when subjected to such scrutiny the worldly relative is rendered non-existent,
yet when left unanalysed consensus makes it existent. And through this tiered approach
the yogi swiftly determines the depths of the actual reality of things. How is this done?The
yogi asks, ‘These seven points show it’s unreal,So how can it exist?’ – and finds that
it does not.With this they easily access the truth of things.That it is real is still accepted
here and now. (6.160)Upon investigation the yogi will think, ‘If the entity that we
call a chariot was inherently established, an identifiable entity should undoubtedly be found
through the sevenfold analysis; but it is not. The chariot is therefore only an idea
entertained when one is under the influence of the cataracts of ignorance, and has no inherent
existence.’ Gaining certainty about this, the yogi will access the reality of things
with ease. The word still (api), emphasises that the relative is not infringed upon, but when
left unanalysed is accepted as real according to consensus.3 Those who are wise will undoubtedly
accept this position, seeing that it is flawless and serves great benefit.

