The bhikshu Chandrakirti’s wayIs based upon the Treatise onThe Middle Way, conforming toThe
scriptures and direct advice. (11.52)

Just as no other source presentsThis dharma in this accurate way,The wise should recognise that
whatIs found herein is quite unique. (11.53)Just as there is no other treatise that presents
the teachings on emptiness in such an unmistaken way as the Middle Way Treatise, I
encourage the wise to assess whether such a presentation of emptiness, and the way of the
arguments and replies presented here, can indeed be found in any other treatise. Understand
thus that those who propose that what the tradition of the Sautrāntikas claim to be the
ultimate is held to be the relative by the Middle Way, are speaking without fully understanding
the essential points presented in the Middle Way Treatise. And those who consider that
what the Vaibhāṣikas present as the ultimate is the relative according to the Middle Way,
likewise do not understand the actual point of the Treatise. This is because it makes no
sense for a supramundane dharma to be in harmony with worldly dharmas, and the wise will
recognise how the present tradition is an extraordinary one.

Thus, as there are some who misunderstand the Master’s intention, and in failing to grasp the
actual meaning are alarmed just by his words, rejecting this world-transcending teaching,
this Entry Into the Middle Way was composed to show the true and unmistaken point of the
Treatise:Some, frightened by the oceanic tinge of Nagarjuna’s mind,Have kept their distance
to this wonderful tradition; but right nowThe dew that makes his verses open like a waterlily’s
budsHave settled, and the hopes of Chandrakirti, Famous Moon, are met. (11.54)‘But
were not the venerable Vasubandhu, Dignaga, Dharmapāla and so forth, in the treatises they
authored, alarmed just by his words, and did they not reject that this was a genuine presentation
of interdependence?’They did indeed say that.

So how should one understand this? To explain:The scary depths of this reality presented here,
is only graspedBy those with some experience – though learned, others will not comprehend.Thus
seeing them as self-devised traditions – those who claim there is a self,Or any other
groups – place not your trust in any other school but this. (11.55)It can be seen how
the misguided, who lacked the required impetus from the past to be drawn towards emptiness,
could still make a connection with other philosophical traditions and be successful in ridding
themselves of the afflictions related to the desire, form and formless realms, but
not develop any interest in the ultimate reality of the Lord of Sages. In the same way, one
should understand that, although these individuals surely possessed traits of great learning,
they lacked the seed that could make them appreciate emptiness and did not therefore
work towards an understanding of it. Still, even these days there are some who did put in
place the conditions for an interest in emptiness in other lifetimes, and just through this
influence appear to reach an understanding of the depths of emptiness, just through such
an influence lose their trust in the veracity of misguided traditions and instead come to
fathom emptiness. Thus, when seeing that these other traditions are simply their own creations,
one should give up all fondness for any tradition that is not the Middle Way, just
as one would for the traditions that promote a self. Don’t be impressed by the intellectual
ways of other traditions – let only the authentic understanding of this very view of emptiness
impress you.

May all the merit gathered from explaining Nāgārjuna’s way fill all of space,Their intellects,
a sky obscured by the afflictions, be lit up by autumn stars,And as they catch the jewel
from the cobra’s head, their minds, may the entire worldThus come to understand reality
and swiftly travel to sugatahood. (11.56)

