To indicate how, when realising complete awakening, the Illustrious One in a single instant
attained the wisdom of omniscience, it was said:Just as there is no difference in the space
within the different jars,No difference is there in existent things in true reality.Thus,
when you came to realise that things are of a single taste,O wise one, in a single instant
you knew all which can be known. (11.11)For example, although jars, bowls and so forth
are different, in its non-obstructive quality the space enclosed by them isn’t different.
Similarly, although existent things – forms, feelings and so forth – are different, the actual
reality pertaining to them, their characteristic unborn nature, is not different, and
actual reality should thus be known to be only of a single taste. And the single moment that
the Illustrious One understands this, in that moment he gains the wisdom of omniscience.

It might be objected:‘If true reality is peace, the mind cannot engage with it.If mind cannot
engage it, then the knowing subject makes no sense.Without a knowing it’s absurd for something
to be known at all.And who is that non-knower teaching others, “This is how it is”?’
(11.12)‘It is established that, “Non-production is the actual reality of forms and so forth,”
and that, “This is what is known.” But when it is established that true reality of things
is pacification, one must then necessarily accept that this is not actually something
with which the conceptual mind can engage. If the mind could engage with the actual nature
of unborn reality, how would it appear to be? Hence, not having any aspects, the actual
reality cannot be mentally engaged with. And when it cannot be mentally engaged with, a knowing
subject certainly makes no sense. How so? As it says: Without a knowing it’s absurd
for something to be known at all. If no knowing at all is taking place, how can something
be known? If mind is unarisen there can be no knower of things, and who are you then imagining
is telling others, “The actual reality of things that I have understood has these characteristics”?
This does not make sense.’

To reply to this:Reality is unborn, and the mind as well is free from birth.Thus, when relating
to this it’s as if it knows reality.For just as it is when the mind takes on the aspects
of somethingThat it can know the object, this makes sense from the conventional stance.
(11.13)This is saying that, when it takes on its concordant aspects, consciousness knows
the object. For example, one can say that, when in the consciousness there is a grasping of
blueness, then blue is known. Similarly, when the consciousness adopts an aspect that conforms
with actual reality, one can designate that it knows actual reality. And to indicate
that consciousness takes on its aspect we find here, reality is unborn, and the mind as
well is free from birth; thus, when relating to this it’s as if it knows reality, establishing
thus that it relates to its aspects. And when saying, for just as it is when the mind
takes on the aspects…, this is then confirmed by referring to an example that is commonly
accepted. Hence it is established that actual reality is known through designation, and not
because there is actually something known by someone, as both the knower and the known
are in fact non-arisen.

And to reply to the statement, and who for you is that non-knower teaching others, ‘This is
how it is’?, although it is true that the mind is unborn in actual reality, it is not impossible
to teach reality within the world. How so? To explain:Through their enjoyment bodies,
brought by merit’s force,And through their powers – emanations, space and more –The Dharma’s
sounds of true reality emerge,And so reality is known within the world. (11.14)Dwelling
in a physical form, the tathāgatas take on inconceivable and multifareous bodies that
make the dharmadhātu evident, brought on through vast merit. These make possible, in different
forms, the bodhisattvas’ enjoyment of the Dharma. And through such verbal utterances
that come about through the blessings of the tathāgatas, born through vast merit – which can
help one also in the present reach an understanding of the various conventions of the scriptures,
such as in the statement, ‘O Mañjuśrī, the expression unborn and unceasing is an
epithet for the Tathāgata’1 – those in the world who are prospective vessels for such teachings
can come to an unmistaken certainty about the actual reality of things. And let alone
through bodies that are formed through merit, when emanations appear through their blessings
they can make clarifying utterances about the reality of things, and the world finds
certainty about actual reality. Their power can operate in other ways apart from that displayed
by emanations – ways not encompassed by mind and mental states – such as space, grass,
trees, walls, stones and so forth, whose sounds can make the world see reality.

When there is no such conceptual activity happening at the present, seeing as there is no mind
or mental factors involved, how can the aforementioned activity occur? To demonstrate this,
an external example is used:As when a master potter plies his wheelAnd labours long to
get it spinning well,The wheel will then keep turning without toilAnd pots and other things
can be produced. (11.15)

It is the same for dharmakāya lordsWho make no effort at the present time,Yet truly marvellous
things do happen inResponse to beings’ merit and great aims. (11.16)Although there are
no concepts involved, they work for the benefit of the limitless realms of beings in ways
that suit those to be trained. In the past they made prayers such as, ‘Just as the illustrious
buddhas, without conceptual ideas, assiduously work in the most beneficial way for the
betterment of beings – like wish-fulfilling jewels or trees of plenty – and whilst not departing
from the dharmadhātu even for an instant, never miss an opportunity to train beings,
I shall do the same.’ And through the power of these, excellent manifestations appear
to carry out the activity of maturing those to be trained, by creating such opportunities
to learn the Dharma. Thus one should understand, that although they do not at present make
any conscious effort in this regard, the actual reality of things is being taught and the
benefit of beings accomplished.

Now, in terms of the dharmakāya, it was said:When all the brittle twigs of what is knownAre
burned, peace comes – the Victor’s dharma form.And then there is no birth and no decay,The
mind will cease, the kāya manifest. (11.17)The wisdom-nature kāya completely burns up the
brittle firewood of knowable things, and since knowable things are unborn, that property
of being unborn is the dharmakāya of the buddhas. In terms of this reality of things (dharmatā),
it is stated:The buddhas see the reality of things,And the guides are the body of dharma.There
is no so-called reality of things,It is not something that can be known.2In the
body of dharma (dharmakāya) there is no birth and no decay, and in terms of this reality
it is said, ‘O Mañjuśrī, the expression unborn and unceasing is an epithet for the Tathāgata.’3
And since mind and mental factors cannot in any way whatsoever take this actual reality,
that is within the sphere of wisdom, as an object, that it manifests in bodily form
(kāya) is something conventionally posited.

And this:The peaceful kāya, lucid like the bounteous tree,Without conceptual thought just like
the wishing-jewel,Grands lasting riches on the world till all are free,Appearing just to
those free from complexity. (11.18)This body, said to be the manifestation of actual reality,
is held to have the nature of peace since it is free from mind and mental factors. But
although its nature is peace, it is lucid in its activities for the benefit of beings,
just like the clarity of the bounteous tree. And like the wishing-jewel has no conceptual
thought, meaning that, although it is free from conceptual ideas, it makes that which is desired
come to be, just like the bounteous tree and the wish-fulfilling jewel do. And this
body remains to bestow riches on the world for as long as samsara exists. The word lasting
indicates that it remains for an extensive period of time. This is thus conveying that the
buddhas remain in this form to carry out the benefit of beings for as long as the world
exists, for as long as space remains. This body ornamented with symbols of hundreds of merits
only appears to exist for bodhisattvas who are free from the complexities of thought,
who have attained the stainless mirror-like intelligence, the result of their accumulations
of merit and wisdom, and it does not appear to those encumbered by the complexities of
conceptual thought.

To describe the incredible ability they have, in terms of making concordant bodies other than
those described above, appear to train beings – whether produced from the dharmakāya or
through the power of the form kāya – it was said:The mighty sages can within a single formAnd
in a single instant demonstrate all pastExistences relating to them, though they’re gone,Complete,
in detail, and with flawless clarity. (11.19)They are able to spontaneously demonstrate
the past existences they had throughout beginningless samsara before they reached
the wisdom of omniscience and can show these clearly and unmistakenly in their totality
without confusing the order in which they occurred, and can do so completely in an instant
and in a single concordant body, like an image appearing completely clearly in a mirror.

To express what occurs when they spontaneously display in a single body all the bodhisattva
activities undertaken, and where, how and why these came about, it was said:They demonstrate
completely in a single formHow buddha realms and mighty sages did appear;And how their
forms, acts, strengths and powers were;The size and manner of the groups of hearers there,
(11.20)

