In terms of the power of knowing fact from fiction, it was said:The wise ones have expressed
what is in fact the caseWhen certain causes bring particular results;And endless incorrect
and contrary ideasThat mars their wisdom have been shed – this is their strength. (11.31)Concerning
the implications of the statement when certain causes bring particular results,
it can be said that certain causes lead to certain results, as is the case when non-virtue
brings the unwanted, and certain things lead to certain attainments, as when the noble
path leads to nirvana, to give but a few examples of what is considered reasonable. There
is a factual basis for certain causes bringing about particular results, and when it says
factual basis, these words are referring to the cause. To be contrary to what has been explained,1
implies that it is non-factual. When something does not give rise to something, no
factual basis for that exists, such as is the case with virtue which does not result in
the unpleasant, and that the eight states will not manifest when one has reached the path
of seeing. This is therefore considered a power of the illustrious buddhas, in that the wise
ones cannot be challenged on this.

As the noble Questions of Dharaṇīśvara Sutra states:O son of noble family, through his supreme
tathāgata-wisdom the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of what is fact, and has precise knowledge
of what is fiction. Son of noble family, what is fact, and what is fiction? O son
of noble family, it is fiction, it is not the case, that doing something physically, verbally,
or mentally negative will yield something desirable, beautiful, joyous, or pleasant.
This is fiction. It is a fact, it is the case, that doing something physically, verbally,
or mentally positive will yield that which is desirable, beautiful, joyous or pleasant. This
is a fact. It is fiction, it is not the case, that stinginess will result in great wealth,
that bad behaviour will lead to birth as a god or human, that malice will lead to beautiful
features, the laziness will lead to realisation, that a distracted mind will be able
to undo faults, that misunderstanding can overcome all that makes habitual patterns continue,
that committing the acts of immediate retribution will bring about a settled mind, that
remaining conceptual can lead to the attainment of harmonious acceptance,2 or that a mind
steeped in regret can be pliable. This is fiction. It is fiction, it is not the case,
that with a female body one can become a wheel-turning monarch, Indra, Brahma… (and so forth).
It is a fact, it is the case, that generosity will result in great wealth… (and so forth,
as above). This is the first tathāgata activity of the Tathāgata.3

In terms of the power of knowing karma and its effects it was said:There’s nothing blocking
their ability to seeWhen acts are right or wrong, or neither of these two,Which grant exhaustion,
and their various effects;They know all this throughout all time – this is their strength.
(11.32)That they have complete understanding of the three types of karma – agreeable
acts, disagreeable acts, acts that are both agreeable and disagreeable, as well as the
undefiled that leads to exhaustion – and the variety of effects these have; that this is
pervasive throughout all the worlds of the three times, each in particular, all their divisions,
and so forth; and that there is nothing that can obstruct this knowledge that pervades
all knowable things for them; this is considered the Illustrious One’s power of knowing
karma and its effects.

As stated:Furthermore, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of all karma occurring in the past,
future and at present, and the occasion, reason, nature and effect of their having been
committed. How does he know them? O son of noble family, the Tathāgata sees how past karma
created through virtue, and unrelated to non-virtue, will yield something wholesome in the
future. The Tathāgata sees how karma created through non-virtue, and divorced from virtue,
will yield something unwholesome in the future. He likewise knows what kind of karma will
bring baseness in the future, and what will bring excellence. And he knows that which
can be base at present but will lead to excellence in the future, and what is excellent at
present but will bring baseness in the future. He likewise knows the details of each such
combination accordingly. The Tathāgata likewise knows the kinds of acts that had a limited
application when committed in the past, but will grow and have a vast application in the
future; what might have been a small undertaking that will have a significant outcome, and
what was a significant undertaking that will have an insignificant outcome; which actions
will yield the result of a hearer, which will yield the result of a solitary buddha, and
which will yield the result of the awakening of a buddha. The Tathāgata knows which types
of acts are painful in the present but will yield a pleasant result in the future, and which
are pleasant at present but will yield an unpleasant result in the future. In this way,
the Tathāgata knows precisely the acts of sentient beings of the past, present and future,
their causes and their results, and knows them directly and without intermediary. Informed
by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the second tathāgata-activity
of the Tathāgata.4

In terms of the power of knowing the variety of dispositions it was said:To know the dispositions
prompted by the strengthOf passion or the like, in all their different hues,The base,
the middling, excellent, and those concealed,For every being throughout time – this is their
strength. (11.33)The function of the word passion (rāga) is to be illustrative of the
afflictions, and implies the others as well, aversion and so forth. Or the like is there
to include all other virtuous states of mind as well, such as faith. The word prompted is
saying that these are seeds of passion and so forth, which is why it is saying prompted by…
passion or the like. Dispositions that are brought about through the seeds of passion and
so forth, or faith and so forth, are referred to as propensity (adhimukti), determination
(adhyāśaya), wish (kāma), or disposition (chanda). There are other types of dispositions
as well where the applications are unclear. And the arising of the comprehensive understanding
that distinguishes between all these different types, is considered the illustrious
Buddha’s power of knowing various dispositions.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of the many
and various dispositions of other sentient beings and individuals. And how, O son of noble
family, does the Tathāgata have precise knowledge of the many and various dispositions
of other sentient beings and individuals? The Tathāgata knows which individuals are desirous
but are inclined towards aversion, which are averse but are inclined towards desire, and
which are confused but are inclined towards desire, anger and confusion. The Tathāgata knows
which individuals are doing virtue but are inclined towards non-virtue. The Tathāgata
knows which individuals apply themselves to minor tasks but have an inclination for significant
tasks, and which ones apply themselves to significant tasks but have an inclination
for minor tasks. The Tathāgata knows the dispositions where little application can have extraordinary
outcomes, extraordinary application can have lesser outcomes, where one is bound
for the positive but can be influenced to use one’s abilities for the negative, is bound
for the negative but can be influenced to use one’s abilities for the positive, where the
outcome is uncertain but one can be influenced to go in a certain direction; which dispositions
might lead to the transcendence of the desire realm, and which can lead to the transcendence
of the form realm, the formless realm, and the transcendence of all the three
realms. Informed by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the third tathāgata-activity
of the Tathāgata.5

In terms of the power of knowing the various elements it was said:Proficient in the elements,
the buddhas teachThe nature of the eye and such as element;The boundless insight of the
perfect buddhas seeAll features of the elements – this is their strength. (11.34)Nature, essence
and emptiness are synonymous. The buddhas are skilled in the divisions of all elements
(dhātu),6 and their knowledge is unobstructed in relation to the many distinctions used
for the nature of the elements, such as characterising them as internally empty and so forth,
and this is then considered the power of knowing the various elements.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata understands the elements of eye,
form and eye-consciousness. He understands the inner emptiness, outer emptiness, and outer-inner
emptiness. (This is applied to all the other group of three among the eighteen elements.)
He knows the element of earth… (and so forth). How does he know these? He knows the
element of space exactly as it is. Likewise, he has considered and precisely understood
the desire, form and formless elements. The Tathāgata knows precisely how the element of the
compounded has the characteristic of something constructed; the element of the non-compounded
has the characteristic of something unconstructed; the element of the thoroughly afflicted
has the characteristic of temporary affliction; the element of the fully purified
has the characteristic of natural luminosity; the element of samsara has the characteristic
of the fault of unknowing; the element7 of nirvana has the characteristic of genuine awareness;
and likewise knows the manner of the elements involved with the world, the elements
that raise one, the elements that lead, the elements that hinder, the elements of intention,
and the elements of support. Informed by this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly.
This is the fourth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.8

In terms of the power of knowing which faculties are superior and which are not it was said:The
total and unhindered understanding ofDiscursive thought and such – the sharpest, deemed
supreme,The dull and middling, lesser ones – and how the eyesAnd such combine to help us
know – this is their strength. (11.35)Discursive thought (saṃkalpa) means mistaken superimposition.
Discursive thought is a faculty, since it is by virtue of it that desire and so
forth are produced. The intent of the words and such is to include virtuous factors such
as faith and so forth. When these are supreme (vara), this implies excellence, while when
they are mean or middling, the term lesser (avara) is used. In saying the eyes and such, the
list of twenty-two faculties, beginning with the eyes, is being referred to.9 To have a
penetrating understanding of the nature of these faculties, and of how they interact to produce
results – a knowledge that is unimpeded – is considered the power of knowing supreme
and inferior faculties.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata knows precisely the state of the
faculties of other sentient beings and individuals. How, O son of noble family, does the
Tathāgata know the state of the faculties of other sentient beings and individuals? O son
of noble family, the Tathāgata knows precisely those beings of dull faculties to be sentient
beings with dull faculties. Similarly, he knows those of middling faculties, and knows
those of sharp faculties. The Tathāgata knows which type of faculty of discursive thought
will produce fully-fledged desire, produce fully-fledged anger, and produce fully-fledged
confusion. (The phrase fully-fledged here implies that it is fully developed.) The Tathāgata
knows which faculty of discursive thought will produce artificial desire, anger and confusion.
The Tathāgata knows which faculty of discursive thought will produce irregular desire,
anger and confusion, and by which faculty of discursive thought the production of desire,
anger and confusion will be ended. The Tathāgata knows everything related to the faculties
that have arisen due to virtue, and which have arisen out of a sense of renunciation.Furthermore,
the Tathāgata knows all the faculties from the eyes up to the faculty of having
understood all. The Tathāgata knows which faculty originates with the eye faculty and
connects with the ear faculty. And likewise from the ear faculty up until the mind faculty.
The Tathāgata knows which beings have a propensity for generosity, but apply themselves
to discipline, and thus by taking the level of the faculties into consideration, gives instructions
on generosity. Likewise for those with a propensity for discipline, patience, diligence,
meditative absorption and intelligence, but who are applying themselves to generosity
and so forth, he gives instructions on discipline and so forth accordingly. Again, to
those with a propensity for the vehicle of the hearers but who are applying themselves to
the vehicle of the solitary buddhas…, (and so forth).O son of good family, the Tathāgata
thus knows precisely that the fully developed faculties of all sentient beings are fully developed
faculties. He knows precisely that the faculties not fully developed are not fully
developed. He knows precisely that not being ready to relinquish they are not ready to relinquish.
He knows precisely that being ready to relinquish they are ready to relinquish.
The Tathāgata knows precisely everything concerning the faculties of sentient beings, how
they are applied, what the motivations are, how they come about, which conditions are influential,
what is the focus, what are the goals, and what will be the end. This is the fifth
tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.10

In terms of the power of knowing every path it is said:To know where all paths lead without
impediment –The ones that lead to buddhahood, or wakeningOf solitary ones or hearers, or to
statesOf spirits, beasts, gods, men, or hell – this is their strength. (11.36)The word path
in this context means a route. The words every path implies that paths may take one anywhere.
Some paths are considered to lead to buddhahood. Some to the awakening of the solitary
buddhas. Some to the awakening of the hearers. Some to the states of gods (and so forth
and so on), and some to hell. The words and so forth11 refer to the various forms these
states can take. The Tathāgata knows precisely where each path leads. Hence, that the knowledge
of the Illustrious One has unhindered access to all paths, is considered the power
of knowing every path.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of the destination
of every path. How does he know them? He knows the type of sentient beings destined
for the wholesome. He knows the type of sentient beings for whom it is uncertain, and those
destined for the unwholesome.He knows the capacity of destined sentient beings. There
are beings who have a powerful impetus from previously having applied themselves to excellent
things, beings who have sharp faculties and can come to understand things without great
exertion, and it might then be proper for the Tathāgata to teach them Dharma, or it might
not. For those who have a potential for liberation, the Tathāgata understands what former
causes and influences are present, thus teaching them the Dharma accordingly.He knows the
capacity of sentient beings of the uncertain kind. Beings for whom there is potential for
development, who might under certain conditions be influenced, and be liberated if they
encounter the appropriate counsel and guidance, but who will not be liberated if these conditions
are not encountered. If the Tathāgata, taking into account the relevant causes and
conditions, were to give them teachings, and they were to take up these teachings and put
them into practice, they would gain the result. For this purpose, the illustrious buddhas
will then appear to them.He knows the capacity of sentient beings destined for the unwholesome.
There are those who haven’t undergone any training, who are slow and dull, and not
suitable vessels; to these the Tathāgata might teach the Dharma, or not. If there is no prospect
of them gaining liberation, the Tathāgata recognising them as unfit vessels, remains
neutral towards them. For these the bodhisattvas don their armour.Furthermore, the Tathāgata
knows the threefold path of attachment. In what way is it threefold? The path of attachment
arising from beauty, the path of attachment arising from passionate concern, and the
path of attachment arising due to past habits. He knows the threefold path of aversion:
the path of aversion arising from anger, the path of aversion arising from expectations not
being met, and the path of aversion arising due to past habits. He knows the threefold
path of confusion: the path of confusion arising from ignorance, the path of confusion arising
from the view of identity, and the path of confusion arising from doubt. These the Tathāgata
knows… (and so forth). In this way the Tathāgata’s wisdom can see without obstruction
the outcome of whichever path sentient beings follow, and how the opposite would turn
out. This is the sixth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.12

In terms of the power of knowing meditative absorptions, liberations, concentrations, states
of equilibrium, and the thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states, it says:To know for
each and every yogin everywhereWhat is their practice of absorptions, freedoms andShamatha,
and which equilibrium amongThe nine – that nothing blocks this knowledge is their strength.
(11.37)Within the unlimited number of worlds there are innumerably many different types
of yogins practicing among other things, the following: the four meditative absorptions
(dhyāna) and the eight liberations (vimokṣa); calm-abiding meditation (śamatha), which
is a concentration (samādhi) defined as a mind with a one-pointed virtuous focus; the nine
progressive states of equilibrium (samāpatti), which are the four absorptions, the four formless
states and the cessation of perception and feeling; the causes of the thoroughly afflicted
state, which are ignorance, incorrect understanding and so forth; the causes of the
fully purified state, which are words agreeable to others and keeping a correct understanding
for oneself. Hence, to have an unhindered understanding of the innumerably many different
absorptions and so forth of different types of yogins, is considered the power of knowing
meditative absorptions, liberations, concentrations, states of equilibrium, and the
thoroughly afflicted and fully purified states.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, the Tathāgata has precise knowledge of absorptions,
liberations, concentrations, states of equilibrium, and the emergence of the thoroughly
afflicted and fully purified states. How does he know them? The Tathāgata knows what the
causes are, and which conditions lead sentient beings to the thoroughly afflicted state.
The Tathāgata knows what the causes are, and which conditions lead sentient beings to find
the fully purified state. What are these causes, and which are the conditions? The cause
for the thorough affliction of sentient beings is mistaken understanding. The condition
for the mistaken understanding of sentient beings is ignorance. Ignorance is the cause and
mental formations the conditions. Mental formations are the cause and consciousness the condition…
(and so forth). Afflictions are the causes and karma the condition. Holding to a
view is the cause and craving the condition. Latent propensities are the causes and the emergence
of these the condition. What are the causes and which are the conditions for the
fully purified state of sentient beings? There are two causes, and two conditions. Which two?
Words agreeable to others and keeping a proper understanding for oneself. A further two
are one-pointed focus of calm abiding and mastery of insight meditation… (and so forth).
These are the causes and the conditions for the purification of sentient beings, and this
the Tathāgata knows.Likewise, O son of noble family, in his wisdom the Tathāgata is separated
from desire, separated from negative non-virtuous qualities, enters into the first absorption
having deliberation and judgement, of joy and bliss emerging from separation, and
then leaves this cessation. Having remained in this cessation he emerges from the first absorption.
He enters the eight liberations in due order, in reverse order, as well as irregularly.
Although he can demonstrate concentrations as states of equilibrium, and demonstrate
states of equilibrium as concentrations, the Tathāgata’s concentrations are never confused;
for the Tathāgata does not need to focus to enter into meditative concentrations. A
single concentration of the Tathāgata makes manifest all concentrations, but the Tathāgata
does not leave one concentration in order to enter into every other concentration; there
is no going from one state of mind to the next for the Tathāgata. One can never perceive the
Tathāgata’s mind to be uncomposed. No one is able to perceive the concentration of the
Tathāgata. The concentration of the hearers is outshone by the concentration of the solitary
buddhas. The concentration of the solitary buddhas is outshone by the concentration of
the bodhisattvas. The concentration of the bodhisattvas is outshone by the concentration of
the Tathāgata. But the Tathāgata’s concentration cannot be outshone; one cannot outshine
the wisdom of the Tathāgata. The Tathāgata knows which instructions and guidance is needed
for the hearers to develop concentration. The Tathāgata knows what is needed for the solitary
buddhas and the bodhisattvas to develop concentration. Aware of this he gives instructions
and teachings accordingly. This is the seventh tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.13

In relation to the power of remembering previous lives it says:To see the lives they lived while
they were still confused,As well as all past lives of every sentient being,However numberless;
their origins, their lands,And how they were – to know all this, this is their strength.
(11.38)The phrase while they were still confused refers to the object of their knowing,
recounting previous existences since beginningless time one after the other. All sentient
beings includes the entire limitless realm of beings. By saying their origins all the
causes involved in this are being included. As the sutra states, ‘… my caste was such and
such, my features were such and such…;’ and remembering that one’s caste was such and such
is referred to here when remembering how they were. They remember, ‘I dwelt in that place,
and then I died and was born in such and such a place. Then I died again and was born
here…,’ which is what is referred to when saying that they remember their lands. In addition
they remember the causes involved. Hence, that the illustrious buddhas have an unhindered
knowledge of past lives, including origins, lands and features, is the power of remembering
previous lives. And it is held that, through this power the illustrious buddhas have
precise awareness of all past stirrings of minds and mental states without exception, and
knowing who has the proper prerequisites and who doesn’t, he will teach the Dharma effectively.

As stated:He has full recollection of the past states of these sentient beings. The Tathāgata
knows past causes, and what past causes led to someone becoming a certain sentient being,
and with this knowledge he teaches the Dharma accordingly. The Tathāgata knows the past
mind states of all sentient beings. The Tathāgata knows which mental objects arose after which,
the objects which made things arise, and the objects whose absence made something cease.
Even if one were to try for as many aeons as there are grains of sand in the river Ganges.
it would be difficult to fully express the workings of the mind of a single sentient
being, one state of mind after another – that after it was in such and such a way, the mind
was like this, and after that it was like this. But the Tathāgata knows the continuity
of mind, each thought following the other, of all sentient beings. And if it could be conceived
of, his wisdom would not reach its limit even if this was demonstrated until the very
end of existence. The Tathāgata’s knowledge of past states is inconceivable and incomparable;
and being immeasurable, to show its full extent is no easy matter. The Tathāgata, the
bull-like Buddha, reminds sentient beings, ‘Take heed. Remember that these are the roots
of virtue that cause sentient beings to be born as buddhas, as hearers and as solitary buddhas.’
It is by the power of the Buddha that they are reminded of this. The Tathāgata will
consider which roots of virtue they are drawn to, through which vehicle they can be liberated
and reach the point of no return, and teaches the Dharma accordingly. This is the eight
tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.14

In terms of the power of knowing the process of death and rebirth it says:To have unhindered
knowledge of the birth and deathOf every sentient being and the state they’re in,Wherever
in the world as far as space extends,In every detail, in each moment, is their strength.
(11.39)Death is the disintegration of the faculties. Birth is to connect with the faculties.
The Tathāgata has accurate and spontaneous moment-to-moment knowledge of the births and
deaths within all worlds to the very reaches of space, and the great variety of karma involved.
That nothing can hinder his wisdom in this regard, that it is uninhibited and fully
pure in every aspect, is considered the Tathāgatas power of knowing the process of death
and rebirth. And not only is it held that the Illustrious One knows the death and rebirth
of all sentient beings, through his divine eye he also has a comprehensive knowledge of the
immense diversity involved in the creation and destruction of universes and so forth.

As stated:The Tathāgata has the divine eye, and with this eye, buddha fields defying enumeration
and extending throughout the reaches of space, throughout the vast expanse of the entire
phenomenal world of the ten directions, can appear to him; and wherever sentient beings
are undergoing ages of destruction and creation, he sees all. Any sentient beings that might
appear, that die and are born, in higher or lower realms, and their karma, he sees all.
Any bodhisattvas that appear, and their death, conception and birth, he sees all. Any buddhas
who manifest the realisation of true and complete awakening, the turning of the Wheel
of Dharma, the giving up of the composite nature of existence and passing into final nirvana,
he sees all. Any hearers who appear, are liberated and pass into final nirvana, he
sees all. Any solitary buddhas who appear, demonstrate magical powers and perfect their attainments,
he sees all. Even sentient beings that cannot be seen, that do not appear to non-Buddhists
who have developed the five supercognitions, nor to hearers, solitary buddhas,
or bodhisattvas, appear to the divine eye of the Tathāgata. The invisible beings the Tathāgata
can see just within the area of a cartwheel, are far more numerous than all the gods
and humans within the worlds of the entire trichiliocosm. The realms of beings that cannot
be seen are immeasurable. The Buddha considers the beings throughout all buddha realms with
his divine tathāgata vision to see which sentient beings may be trained. And the Buddha
appears in front of all those who are able to learn, training them without the knowledge
of other beings who are not. This is the ninth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.15

In terms of the power of knowing the exhaustion of defilements it says:The strength of their
omniscience instantly defeatsAfflictions and their imprints; and afflictions areBlocked by
the insight of disciples and so forth –To know this fully without hindrance is their strength.
(11.40)Afflictions refers to ignorance, attachment and so forth, and it is these that
afflict the threefold world. Being that which infuses and pollutes the mind and then remains,
they are called imprints (vāsanā); potential afflictions, habitual patterns, seeds
and imprints are all synonymous. Although they have abandoned the afflictions through the
practice of the undefiled path, hearers and solitary buddhas are not able to fully rid themselves
of these. Similar to the example of removing sesame oil, flowers or the like from
a pot, a piece of cloth and so on – as they have been in contact, a trace of them will remain.
In the same way, although for the arhat the afflictions have been removed, there are
still imprints present; and the manner of moving by jumping about that one had in the past
as a monkey, or the manner of speaking to servants that one had in the past as a brahmin,
which have been pacified by the illustrious one (bhagavan), have not been arrested by the
former. The imprints of ignorance that remain, prevent one from fathoming phenomena, and
the imprints of attachment and so forth that remain will be causes for tending towards particular
physical and verbal ways. Only omniscient and awakened buddhas have abolished the
imprints of ignorance, attachment and so forth, no one else. Hence, the buddhas’ complete
and unobstructed knowledge of having rid themselves of all remaining imprints of the afflictions
and having rid themselves of the afflictions that these imprints sustain, is considered
the power of knowing the exhaustion of defilements.

As stated:Furthermore, O son of noble family, having exhausted all defilements the Tathāgata
sees clearly, sees directly, that he is undefiled, his mind is liberated, his intelligence
is liberated, and rests in this attainment with the thought, ‘My births are at an end –
I have led a life of purity, done what needed to be done, and after this life there will for
me be no more existences.’ The Tathāgata’s knowledge of having exhausted the defilements
is pure, unstained, immaculate, luminous, and a true conquering of all sustaining habitual
imprints. The hearers’ exhaustion of defilements is limited as they have not truly conquered
the habitual imprints. The solitary buddhas’ exhaustion of defilements is limited as
they do not have great compassion and eloquence. The tathāgatas’ exhaustion of defilements
is perfect in every way as they have truly overcome all sustaining habitual imprints. It
is embraced by great compassion, with confidence and eloquence. Nothing in the whole world
can challenge it, and it is present within each moment of mind. Why? The Tathāgata has no
more karmic imprints, afflictive imprints, or imprints of deluded conduct. Just as space
itself is naturally pure and unaffected by dust and smoke, the Tathāgata’s awareness of the
exhaustion of defilements is unaffected by any karmic or afflictive imprints. And as soon
as this exhaustion of defilements is a reality, he will teach the Dharma to sentient beings
who still find themselves in defiled states of grasping, so that they may rid themselves
of these defiled ways and grasping: ‘O sentient beings governed by mistaken ways of thinking,
you must come to properly understand how this defilement and grasping takes place!’
Thus the Tathāgata teaches them the Dharma using appropriate examples to illustrate how
they can come to properly ascertain that the defilements are not genuine, and through seeing
this, cut their grasping to phenomena and reach final transcendence. This, O son of noble
family, is the tenth tathāgata-activity of the Tathāgata.16And in addition to these completely
perfect features, the scope of the Tathāgata’s wisdom is inconceivable, he has countless
other special qualities, dwells in a state indistinguishable from the dharmakāya, and
it is only space itself by which the vastness of each of his qualities can be quantified.
The illustrious buddhas are the protectors for the defenceless beings drowning in the four
great rivers – the rivers of desire, existence, views and ignorance – and these ten powers
are fully actualised for them on the buddha ground, Universal Illumination. This will
not be further elaborated on here.

