To determine the qualities they gain from the first resolve and onwards it was said:This is
the time when they a hundred buddhas see,And likewise come to know that by them they are blessed.For
hundred aeons on this stage they can remain,And know precisely what has passed
and what will be. (11.1)

These wise ones enter and depart a hundred concentrations, andAre able to make tremble and illuminate
a hundred worlds;Displaying miracles they can mature a hundred sentient beings,And
have the means to travel to a hundred realms of purity. (11.2)

The scions of the Mighty One unlock a hundred Dharma doors,And in their bodies they reveal a
hundred manifested forms.The beauty and the riches of their retinue promotes their own,Reflected
in each of the hundred victor’s heirs they make appear. (11.3)As stated:Having gone
forth, they attain and enter repeatedly a hundred concentrations each second, each moment,
each instant. They see a hundred buddhas and perfectly understand their blessings. They
cause a hundred world systems to shake, travel to a hundred pure realms, illuminate a hundred
worlds, mature a hundred beings, remain for a hundred aeons, have access to a hundred
aeons into the past and future, unlock a hundred doors of Dharma, display a hundred bodies,
each body again displaying a retinue of a hundred bodhisattvas.1

Such are the qualities the wise ones gain uponThe Joyous ground, and on Immaculate the sameIs
gained but then increased a thousandfold. …And these same hundredfold qualities that the
bodhisattvas gain when developing the first resolve, are then expanded as they gain them
a thousandfold when developing the second resolve.And upon the development of the third resolve
these same qualities are then:… And onThe five succeeding ones their qualities increase:
(11.4)

They gain these qualities a hundred thousandfold,A billionfold, ten billionfold, a trillionfold,And
then ten million trillionfold – thus multipliedIn stages by the thousands, all of
this they gain. (11.5)As explained, the bodhisattvas developing the third resolve gain a hundred
thousand of these qualities. On developing the fourth they gain a billion. On developing
the fifth they gain ten billion. On developing the sixth they gain a trillion. And on
developing the seventh resolve the bodhisattvas gain ten quintillion of these same qualities.

Beyond this the qualities become impossible to calculate, equal to the number of the most minute
particles:When dwelling on the ground Immovable they areBeyond conceptual thought, and
qualities they gainAs many as the particles one finds withinA hundred thousand trichiliocosmic
worlds. (11.6)The bodhisattvas who develop the eight resolve gain as many of these
mentioned qualities are there are particles within a hundred thousand trichilocosm worlds.

And when they find themselves on Perfect Intellect,Such bodhisattvas gain the mentioned qualitiesTen
times as many as the particles one mayEncounter in a hundred thousand countless worlds.
(11.7)The bodhisattvas who develop the ninth resolve gain as many of these former qualities
as there are particles within a million countless2 trichiliocosms.

So many are their qualities upon the tenthThey cannot be expressed by any verbal means.When
added up they are in number equal toAll atoms that exist, indeed unutterable. (11.8)The bodhisattvas
who develop the tenth resolve gain as many of the mentioned qualities as there
are minute particles in the inexpressibly many untold buddha realms. In the phrase so many
are the qualities upon the tenth, the words so many (tāvat?) are saying that to indicate
the qualities attained on this level by for instance saying that they amount to such and such
a number, is not possible.

Furthermore, regarding these bodhisattvas:They have the power to continuously displayWithin
each pore of their own bodies numberlessAwakened buddhas with their bodhisattva hosts,As well
as humans, demigods and gods alike. (11.9)The bodhisattvas who have developed the tenth
resolve are able to display within each pore of their body, and without any conceptual effort,
innumerable illustrious buddhas and their pure realms presiding over immeasurable retinues
of bodhisattvas, and can alter these appearances every moment. Furthermore, in each
instant they have the power to display within each of their pores, the five types of beings
of samsara, humans and so forth, without any confusion between them. The words as well
as (api) include also other beings not mentioned, as when it states, ‘… Indra, Brahma, the
world-guardians (lokapāla), kings of men, hearers, solitary buddhas – the Tathāgata assumes
the forms of Indra and so forth to teach the Dharma to beings receptive to the training.’3
Detailed descriptions of the qualities may be found in the same sutra.4This completes
the presentation of the qualities related to the bodhisattva grounds.

Something must now be mentioned in relation to the qualities of the ground of buddhahood, and
this is done in hymnic form and directed at the illustrious Buddha. As stated:Because the
moon is at its brightest shining from a cloudless sky,Ahead you ventured on this ground
wherein ten powers are produced,And found in Akanishta what you sought, the stage of utmost
peace,Accomplishing the peerless goal endowed with every quality. (11.10)Just as only from
a clear sky will the moon illuminate all that lives, the Illustrious One removed the darkness
obstructing the attainment of buddha qualities, saw that now having accomplishing the
tenth resolve he had the potential to attain the qualities of a buddha, and thus applied
himself towards this next stage, buddhahood. And what the Tathāgata strove to gain, the
unsurpassable wisdom, he found in Akanishta. This is where all qualities are brought to completion,
as it is where every quality becomes complete and perfect. Peerless, there is nothing
like it and nothing beyond it.

